Jesus and Muhammad -- F. E. Peters (Quotes)
===============================================

:date: 2015-09-15 18:01:19 +0300

.. :author: Emin Reşah
.. :date: Sat May 16 14:38:37 EEST 2015 
.. :dp: 13088 



[T]he historian approaches the Quran document without Muslim consent,
which is not crucial, but also without valuable Muslim
assistance. (p. xvi)

------

Other saints earn their authority by their personal holiness, that
famous “odor of sanctity” that exudes from their persons. Jesus and
Muhammad doubtless possessed that, but their authority derived from
elsewhere, as they claimed and as their followers believed: they were
the chosen of God. And they spoke with an authority higher than
themselves (p. xvii)

------

Muhammad was a mortal; he was born, lived, and died in Western Arabia
at the turn into the seventh Christian century. As just remarked, his
remains are believed to be in a tomb inside a mosque in Medina, where
he died. (p. xviii)

------

Quran gives no signs of being acquainted with the actual Christian
Gospels, which are our earliest and best source of information about
Jesus. Rather, the Quranic information about Jesus seems late,
derivative, and legendary (p. xx)

------

As Christians became better informed and, more to the point, as more
and more Christians were swept under Muslim sovereignty, heresy was
discarded as too benign a characterization of Islam (p. xx)

------

Gospels were written in the popular, almost demotic Koine Greek of the
Mediterranean world. Quran, in contrast, was orally composed in an
improvisational and artisanal Arabic Kunstsprache that was the poetic
medium of the day and whose intricacies were in this particular case
thought to be God-given (p. xxii)

------

It is the believers who chiefly bother the skeptics, those devotees so
committed to their faith, it is suspected, that they might well be
willing to invent anything, including its founder. (p. 1)

------

The best and most useful of the available evidence for the careers of
Jesus and Muhammad is literary, that is, written accounts about them,
many from apparent eyewitnesses, and some even purport to have
preserved our subjects’ very words (p. 1)

------

Jesus, it turned out, is not in the Scrolls—nor are the Essenes in the
Gospels!—and he was certainly not himself an Essene (p. 6)

------

Our Arab sources make a great deal of the commercial activity of Mecca
in that same era, but neither Procopius, who had looked, nor anyone
else had apparently ever heard of the place. (p. 8)

------

Mecca and Medina had no archives in Muhammad’s day, nor any, it
appears, for a long time thereafter. In the sixth and seventh
centuries they were centers of an oral society where writing, if it
existed at all, was of an extremely limited and specialized
use. (p. 8)

------

There is no lack of evidence for Muhammad’s Mecca. It is, however,
entirely literary, and it dates from more than a century later the
Prophet’s death. And it is the product of a different society living
in a place very different from the pagan and tribal Mecca of the sixth
and early seventh centuries (p. 9)

------

Muhammad’s own Quran was in fact what are now the constitutive parts
of our book, those stanza-like units (suras) whose original contours
are no longer easy to discern (p. 9)

------

Like the Homeric poems, its sophistication seems to signal the prior
existence of a religio-poetic tradition. There is no trace of such,
however; the Quran appears to be a virginal conception. And if it is
mysterious what kind of prior tradition could produce the Quran, what
is even more mysterious is who in that society barely emerging from
illiteracy had the skills to write it down (p. 10)

------

Muhammad lived in a very different place, and we cannot be sure that
he ever left it. The population of Mecca in the Hijaz was singularly
Arab, relatively recent transplants from a tribal to an urban culture
with the shared values of each, uniquely Arabophone and vastly
illiterate. (p. 10)

------

[T]he Prophet seems never to have had direct encounters with
Christians until the very end of his life (p. 10)

------

On the evidence of the Quran alone we would know little or nothing of
Mecca save that perhaps there was such a place (p. 12)

------

At their very best they confirm for us that in the 60s in Rome there
was a group of religious fanatics who called themselves “Christers”
and who caused problems—unspecified—for the Roman authorities (p. 15)

------

Not all Jews of Jesus’ day believed in the imminence of the End Time
nor in a Messiah; Jesus’ followers obviously did, and the shape and
color of their belief can be read of the pages of this apocalyptic
literature. The Dead Sea Scrolls reveal just one such apocalyptic
community in the grip of expectation of the End Time. The Jesus
movement was another (p. 17)

------

According to the statements in the Talmud regarding Jesus, his birth
was illegitimate: he was the son of Miriam (by one account a
hairdresser) who had conceived of a certain Pantheros, a Roman
soldier. By the same accounts Jesus was put to death by the Jews,
either by crucifixion or by hanging, on the capital charge of having
led the people astray. (p. 17)

------

If we isolate and look more closely at what constitutes Q, it becomes
apparent that Q was a collection of Jesus’ sayings, or logoi, as they
were called in his day. And only sayings. there is, oddly, no death by
crucifixion, no resurrection (p. 19)

------

Who would make such a collection and why? Was it a kind of primitive
catechism to serve as an introduction to the Jesus movement, leaving
the hard parts till later? Was it conceivably a real Gospel (p. 19)

------

And “Thomas” presents to us, exactly like Q, a Jesus who had not died
on the cross and had not risen from the dead. The Jesus of both Thomas
and Q was simply a teacherpreacher (p. 20)

------

On all the evidence, by the second century Christians were already
using in their church services these four Gospels and these alone. So
it appears that relatively early on there had developed a consensual
Gospel canon among the individual congregations ( ekklesiai ) of
Christians that had come into existence around the Mediterranean
(p. 20)

------

By all accounts the siege and fall of Jerusalem and the destruction of
its Temple was a dramatic and a traumatic event in the life of the
Jews, including Jesus’ emerging first generation of followers (p. 21)

------

John’s Jesus has a very distinct point of view that is enunciated in a
highly sophisticated language and imagery quite alien to the
aphoristic and homely Jesus portrayed in Mark and Q
(p. 22)

------

In this earliest portrait of Jesus there was no eschatology, no
passion narrative, and no resurrection or appearances account. Jesus
was a wisdom teacher purely and simply and it merely remains to
determine of what sort. (p. 24)

------

[M]ay not be all Muhammad pronounced—indeed there is good evidence
that all his revelations are not in our Quran—but there is no
indication of interpolation or tampering (p. 26)

------

There is in it no visible reflection on Muhammad’s unhappy Meccan
experiences, no vindictiveness against the Quraysh who had sought to
kill him, and, perhaps most surprisingly, no triumphalist gloating in
the light of the increasing successes of Muslim armies and the ever
wider spread of Islam. Unlike Jesus, Muhammad lived long enough to be
his own Constantine, (p. 26)

------

The Medina suras of the Quran do not lack for confidence, but they are
not filled with either self-praise or self-congratulation. The Quran
“ends”—a very imprecise notion—much as it “began,” with its gaze
focused on Salvation History and not on the contemporary events at
Mecca and Medina that the historian is so eager to hear about. (p. 27)

------

In the eyes of the skeptics, the Prophetic traditions were orally
transmitted for a century and a half after Muhammad’s death and during
that period underwent substantial transformation (p. 34)

------

Our primary sources, as well as the later rabbinic writings, do seem
to indicate, however, that the paternity of Jesus, who is quite
remarkably called “son of Mary” (Mk 6:3), was problematic, or at least
unusual (p. 42)

------

He was certainly Aramaic-speaking, though it is not inconceivable that
he knew some Hebrew (learned in the local synagogue), some Greek, and
perhaps even a smattering of Latin patois. (p. 45)

-----

And yet no one comments on the fact that Jesus was not married. here
the matter seems to stand. The Jesus movement had, however, an
increasingly important investment in celibacy and so there has been a
constant insistence from within the Christian tradition that Jesus
himself was celibate (p. 46)

-----

There is, however, a South Arabian inscription that describes an
Abraha-led military engagement east of Mecca that seems to belong to
the same campaign. It bears the date in the local era that yields AD
552, which places both Abraha and his military foray far too early to
be connected to the birth of Muhammad. (p. 50)

-----

Once the notion of “covenants” or commercial treaties is no longer
squeezed out of this sura, the annual Quraysh caravans to Syria and
the Yemen disappear, and with them, the entire fable of Hashim the
trader and Mecca as a kind of sixth-century Venice-in-the-Hijaz
(p. 60)

-----

If there was any trading going on in or around Mecca in the sixth
century, as there assuredly was, it was probably in raisins and
leather, and it inevitably had some connection with the shrine there
(p. 60)

-----

Even the traditional fixing at 570, which is arrived at simply by
counting back the stereotypical forty years from his call to prophecy,
is almost certainly much too early for Muhammad’s actual year of birth
(p. 61)

-----

For us it is inconceivable that its compilers knew of such things,
particularly the resurrection, and neglected or chose not to mention
them.(p. 64)

-----

What is more often proposed is that the compositors of Q knew of
Jesus’ crucifixion but chose not to mention it, presumably because it
had no significance for them; or more, because it was a reversal, an
embarrassment that was best forgotten. (p. 70)

-----

The Quran, without a genuine beginning or end, is a kind of Möbius
recitative looping through eternity. (p. 73)

-----

One conclusion from this is that we are here in the presence of an
oral recitation, which no one doubts, but the logic may lead to a more
profound, and radical, conclusion, that Muhammad belonged to a
tradition of oral poetry and so was composing as well as declaiming:
singing, performing, and composing are closely connected acts in an
oral tradition (p. 75)

-----

Whatever the similarities in style and matter, some at least of
Muhammad’s audience went away with the conviction that they had heard
the words not of a poet but of God. (p. 75)

-----

And there must also have been gestures: as already noted, many of the
dramatic presentations of the Judgment—the just on one side and the
unjust on the other (50:20–26 and 37:50–56, e.g.)—would be
unintelligible without identifying gestures or perhaps changes in
vocal register (p. 76)

-----

[A]udience reaction (101:9–11), or in these instances, perhaps a lack
of it. There are direct answers to both questions and criticisms
(2:135, etc.). And there was, finally, the charge that the
“revelations” were somewhat too improvised, that Muhammad was in
effect making it up as he went along, with one eye steadily fixed on
the main chance (21:5, 52:33). (p. 76)

-----

[T]he Muslims were not speaking in tongues like the early Christians
who had received “the gifts of the Holy Spirit”; they were repeating
what was now a text (p. 77)

-----

And his listeners drew the appropriate conclusion, that these were
“old stories” and that he must have gotten his poetry from someone
else, and even that what he was “reciting” had been “recited” or
“passed on”—this is not the same word as that referring to the
Quran—to him (p. 78)

-----

At first merely allusively and then in far more detail as salvation
stories, either because the allusions were not working or perhaps
because of obvious audience interest in this new historical
storytelling approach to Muhammad’s message. (p. 79)

-----

Where did the Prophet’s apparently pagan audience receive an
understanding that matched his own, the pre-Islamic poets may have
had, as some maintain, some notion of biblical ideas , but they
certainly know nothing of the biblical stories with which Muhammad and
his audience were seemingly familiar (p. 80)

-----

What we have in extensive segments of the Quran are nothing less than
the scattered members of a seventh century midrash on the
Bible. (p. 80)

-----

The prosody of Quran bears little resemblance to the highly formalized
metrics of the ancient Arabic ode, but does it show the
characteristics of the kahin’s saj‘? The subsequent Muslim literary
tradition says “No,” as indeed it must since to grant that the Quran
is a form of saj‘ is to concede in effect that Muhammad was a kahin as
charged. More, those same critics were careful to so define saj‘ that
the Quran’s diction could not possibly qualify as such (p. 81)

-----

We do not know where this minor merchant of Mecca learned to make
poetry. For the Muslim tradition there was necessarily no issue here
and so it offered no explanation; both the content and the diction of
the Quran—its language, style, and very tropes— were from God. (p. 82)

-----

Whether it was the “fine magic of the language” that brought it to
pass, as one early nineteenth-century critic thought, or simply an
act of God, there was no sensible way by which an untrained
Meccan—the question of Muhammad’s illiteracy is irrelevant; most oral
poets, and certainly the best, have been illiterate— (p. 82)

-----

Where the term “the anointed” ( ha-mashiah ) appears in the Bible, it
is not used as a title but simply as a descriptive word that is
regularly and normally applied to a priest or, more generally, a king,
and never to a figure from the onrushing End Time (p. 95)

-----

The early followers of Jesus, like Jesus himself and like most of
their fellow Jews, read religious texts in an “open” fashion. They
were not limited by the same “constraints of history” as ourselves
about what we consider a historically accurate—that is, a contextual—
understanding of a given text, whether Isaiah or Daniel or
Enoch. There were no “authentic” readings, just hopefully persuasive
ones (p. 95)

-----

Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I
have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. I tell you the
truth, until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not
the least stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law
until everything is accomplished.” (p. 101)

-----

And just as Jesus is understood to have followed the traditional
Jewish practices of his day, so Muhammad may be assumed to have
participated in the civil religion of Mecca before his call to Islam
(p. 106)

-----

Though he protested that he was just a man (17:93, 41:6), Muhammad was
declared by Muslims to be as free from sin as Mary was for
Christians. Mary just got there a little sooner: she had an
“Immaculate Conception”; he had perhaps to await the “Opening of the
Prophet’s Breast.” (p. 106)

-----

He was sleeping when the Angel Gabriel appeared, covered him with a
blanket, “on which was some writing,” and said, “Recite (p. 106)

-----

Muhammad was uncertain what had occurred to him and the identification
of the experience comes from an expert and a Christian, which makes it
all the more credible (p. 109)

-----

Had not the boy Muhammad already been recognized and acknowledged as a
prophet, by the monk Bahira among others? (p. 110)

-----

Waraqa tells Muhammad that what has occurred to him was what had once
happened to Moses with the sending down of the Torah on Sinai, where
namus is clearly an Arabic transcription of the Greek nomos , the
“Law” or Torah (p. 110)

-----

What is chiefly remarkable, perhaps, is that in the early Meccan
suras Muhammad almost invariably refers to the deity not as “Allah”
but rather as “Lord” ( Rabb ) or, since God is often the speaker, by
the self-referential “your Lord (p. 110)

-----

Who was Muhammad’s “Lord”? It is not at all clear, not at any rate at
this point, though later it is unmistakably the Allah of the Quraysh,
and, of course, the Almighty God of the Jews and Christians (p. 111)

-----

The trouble was, they worshiped other gods as well, and one of the
central aims of the Meccan preaching was to make the Quraysh and other
Meccans surrender their attachment to other deities, the idols and
empty names they associated with the one true God (p. 111)

-----

We do not always know the contexts in which the Quraysh venerated
their gods, which prayers went with which sacrifices, or how the
pre-Islamic “retreat” with its prayer and fasting favored by Muhammad
was combined with the pilgrimage ritual ( hajj (p. 111)

-----

Quraysh had no problems with the Prophet’s morning prayer at the
Ka‘ba, but to perform the prayer at sunset, Muhammad and his
companions had to scatter to nearby ravines. (p. 112)

-----

This story, or something like it, has a claim to authenticity. The
criterion of embarrassment rises unbidden from its lines: it is
impossible to imagine a Muslim inventing such an inauspicious
tale. But even without the accompanying story, the implications of a
Quranic verse being uttered and then withdrawn are profound for
Islamic scriptural theology and jurisprudence. (p. 114)

-----

Though it has its own particular details, the Quran’s version of the
End is obviously different from anything we encounter among the
pre-Islamic Arabs, whose view of the Afterlife was dim rather than
apocalyptic, but it is noticeably similar to that current among the
Jews and Christians (p. 115)

-----

The story of the prophets is rehearsed at length in the Quran, never
quite consecutively in the manner of a history, but rather to make the
same point that Jesus insists on in the Q source, to wit, when
humankind has refused to heed the bearers of God’s message, the
consequences have been terrible (22:42–43). The lesson here is even
clearer than Jesus’ own: (p. 116)

-----

The position of Jesus in Muhammad’s thinking appears to rule out a
straightforward Jewish source for the thinking on display in the
Quran. Nor would an orthodox Christian one regard Jesus, as Muhammad
does, as a prophet rather than the Son of God (p. 117)

-----

Muhammad prayed thrice daily and facing Jerusalem, practiced ritual
purity, abstained from pork and wine, and yet knew about a miraculous
Eucharistic banquet (p. 118)

-----

We do not know how or whence these putative Jewish Christian
convictions came to Mecca. They let no institutional trace but their
presence was deep and powerful (p. 118)

-----

Islam was nothing other than the din Ibrahim , the “religion of
Abraham” (2:135), which was still, despite the travails of a long bout
of pagan polytheism, from which Muhammad absolutely disassociated
himself (109:6), deeply embedded in the fabric of Mecca (p. 119)

-----

The Jerusalem Temple priesthood, whose integrity had been compromised
under both the Maccabees and Herod, was a provocative issue for many
Jews in Jesus’ day, but Jesus himself appears to have had no problems
with either the institution or the individuals who comprised it
(p. 127)

-----

[W]hen an oral poet or storyteller is performing for or in the
presence of one who will commit that performance to writing, there are
considerable changes that will take place, changes that emanate from
both the performer’s self-consciousness (altered speed, pace,
deliberateness, emphasis) coupled with a desire to impress, and the
transcriber’s willingness to “improve” what he is hearing (p. 134)

-----
 
The change of audience, and so of purpose, from Mecca to Medina is
true and important, but is it not equally plausible to think that
Muhammad may have found a scribe at Medina? The Medina suras do indeed
show some of the signs of a dictated text, in circumstances perhaps
where the Prophet could no longer recite in the earlier bardic style
but now had to pronounce, and slowly and clearly enough for an
unskilled scribe to catch and record it (p. 135)

-----

Everything we know about that time and place makes it highly unlikely
that there should be in Medina in Muhammad’s day a scribe skilled
enough to have taken down the suras as dictation (p. 136)

-----

The simplest solution is that Q was collected or composed as a record—
whatever its purpose—of Jesus’ sayings, perhaps during his lifetime,
or perhaps immediately after his death since that event seems to be
only faintly reflected in the collection, and certainly before the
resurrection stories began to circulate. Mark’s Gospel presents a more
difficult problem. It is a composition one of whose purposes, and
perhaps its chief purpose, was, on the face of it, to explain Jesus’
death by execution (p. 147)

-----

The simplest solution is that Q was collected or composed as a record—
whatever its purpose—of Jesus’ sayings, perhaps during his lifetime,
or perhaps immediately at er his death since that event seems to be
only faintly rel ected in the collection, and certainly before the
resurrection stories began to circulate. Mark’s Gospel presents a more
difficult problem. It is a composition one of whose purposes, and
perhaps its chief purpose, was, on the face of it, to explain Jesus’
death by execution. It does this in detail, and while it mentions,
almost in passing, the fact of his resurrection (16:7), it seems
unaware of the importance of the appearance witnesses who in Paul
stand so central to the proof that the resurrection in fact
occurred. (p. 147)

-----

Though the commonly held opinion is that the Gospels were composed
after Paul’s letters of the 50s, they are very un-Pauline
documents. They share very few of Paul’s theological and
ecclesiastical concerns.(p. 148)

-----

He will remain until I come,” Jesus mysteriously says (v. 22). The
Christian tradition stretched the life of this John for as far as it
would go, but when he died in Ephesus, perhaps sometime about AD 100,
it was said, the Lord had still not come. (p. 149)

-----

The Acts of the Apostles shows the earliest believers preaching the
risen Jesus inside Jewish synagogues of the eastern Mediterranean
Diaspora (Acts 13:26, 43, 48, etc.), where in that era Gentiles
constituted a small but welcome audience of interested parties, and
even occasionally in more public non-Jewish venues (Acts 17:17,
19:9–10). (p. 150)

-----

Paul responded that he had in fact a divinely appointed mission to be
“a light for the Gentiles.” He had had to preach the Good News to the
Jews first, of course, “but since you reject it, we now turn to the
Gentiles” (Acts 13:46–47) (p. 150)

-----

Had Jesus in fact said, “Go then to all nations and make them my
disciples . . .” (Mt 28:19)? The reports from his own lifetime are
quite different, however. (p. 150)

-----

“Do not take the road to Gentile lands. . . . Go rather to the lost
sheep of Israel” (Mt 10:5– (p. 151)

-----

[W]hen confronted by a local Gentile woman begging a cure, Jesus
remarks, “I was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel and to
them alone” (Mt 15:24) (p. 151)

-----

“Nothing that goes into a person from the outside can defile him,”
Jesus says, “because it does not go into his heart but into his
stomach” (Mk 7:18 (p. 151)

-----

In Acts, Peter, who cries out to God, “I have never eaten anything
that is unclean!” (10:14), has to be reassured by a vision from on
high that it is permissible to associate with Gentiles (p. 151)

-----

And later he is publicly accused of transgression by his fellow
Christians: “You have been visiting men who are uncircumcised, sitting
at table with them” (11:3). And Paul too, as we have seen, encountered
the same kind of opposition from Jesus’ immediate followers. It seems,
then, highly unlikely that Jesus thought of his message as intended
for Gentiles or that he instructed his followers to carry it to any
but Jews. (p. 151)

-----

There is no reason, then, that either we or his contemporaries should
expect that Muhammad’s career be capped with some divine
vindication. He had made no claim to function as a mahdi or
eschatological guide; indeed, such a messiahlike figure appears
nowhere in the Quran’s various scenarios of the End Time (p. 152)

-----

Muhammad’s Meccan audience had demanded miracles of him
(17:90–92). He refused. He was, he insisted, merely a mortal
(18:110). The Islamic tradition continues to affirm his mortality,
particularly in the face of what are in Muslim eyes the extraordinary
Christian claims of divinity for Jesus, who was a prophet—and
mortal—as the Quran insists (3:59) and as Muslims freely recognize (p. 154)

-----

One result of this profusion of information about the personal adab
of the Prophet is that Islamic behavior has, in addition to an
internal moral code and prescriptive regulations regarding behavior,
a sense of a particular lifestyle not immediately present in either
Judaism or Christianity, both of which prefer epigone models, a
Francis of Assisi—whose own appropriation of the Jesus adab proved
unsustainable—or one of the Eastern European rebbes who stand behind
the Hasidic movement (p. 157)

-----

Politically Muhammad was relentless, even ruthless; pragmatic rather
than an ideologue, but unbending on the core values of Islam;
thin-skinned to a fault, quick to blame and equally quick to forgive;
possessed of piety but the very antithesis of pious; famously uxorious
yet married, monogamously, to the same woman for twenty-four years:
she the mother of all his surviving children and their only daughters
in a society that valued male heirs above all else; excessive in
little besides energy and profound conviction; and generous, always
generous. (p. 158)

-----

In his defense of the use of religious images against the
eighth-century Christian iconoclasts, John of Damascus called them
“books for the illiterate” that differed from what was in Scripture
only in that they pictured in line and color what the Bible had
painted in words (p. 159)

-----

During Muhammad’s lifetime, and for very long thereafter, conversion
to Islam followed upon conquest; it never preceded it. Christians, on
the other hand, had converted anywhere from 10 percent to 20 percent
of the Roman Empire before Constantine became a Christian. Christian
missionaries often preceded armies; they leaped across frontiers,
worked behind the enemy lines deep in Germany, Central Asia, India,
and China. (p. 168)

-----

The often-styled “Constitution of Medina” included in the Ibn
Ishaq–Ibn Hisham biography of Muhammad is an example of what is
perhaps an authentic preserved document, while the extensive
correspondence conducted by Muhammad and various world leaders and
reproduced in other biographies is almost certainly all
invented. (p. 172)

-----

Jesus was thought by his followers not so much inspired as speaking in
his own voice with the authority of God Himself, his “Father in
heaven.” The Gospels, on the other hand, were regarded as inspired,
written as they were by human hands under the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, though how precisely that worked is not clear (p. 173)

-----

Muhammad was regarded as inspired in the sense that what issued from
his mouth in the identifiable "revelational mode, probably signaled by
some form of cantillation on Muhammad’s part, had come word for word
from God through the Angel Gabriel. There was no human agency or
conditioning involved in Muhammad’s utterances, and though our Quran,
the “copy” ( mushaf ), is the product of human editing, its contents
share the same divine guarantee as the words uttered by the
Prophet. (p. 173)

-----

The closest analogue is in the authentic letters of Paul, which are
arranged in the New Testament canon in the same order of descending
length, though here the chief consideration was fitting them
economically on a standard papyrus roll, a mechanical element that
does not appear to have been in play in the ordering of the
Quran. (p. 174)

-----

Munahhemana in Syriac means, like the Hebrew Menachem, “comforter,”
and seems linguistically unrelated to either “Ahmad” or “Muhammad,”
whose root meaning (H-M-D) is “praise.” Another possibility is that
the Quran, or someone, was familiar with a Gospel text that read at
John 14:16, instead of the more usual parakletos , the variant
periklytos , which does stand in some manuscripts and might
reasonably be rendered as “Ahmad” in Arabic. In any event, Quran 61:6
caused later Muslims, and Ibn Ishaq was not the first, to search out,
first in the Gospels and eventually in the entire Bible, predictions
of the coming of Muhammad, the “seal of the prophets.” (p. 175)

-----

The implication is clear: a recited Quran is the genuine Quran; the
written version is merely a copy. (p. 176)

-----

to compound the curiosity, the other Jesus sayings source, the Gospel
of Thomas, has 114 logoi, the same number as the suras of the
Quran. (p. 176)

-----

Whoever divorces his wife and marries another, commits adultery
against her; and if she divorces her husband and marries another, she
commits adultery (p. 177)

-----

The spoils of Badr were large enough at any rate to provoke a dispute
about their division among the raiders (p. 179)


