Title: Filtered Many Worlds
Author: Emin Re≈üah
Date:  2017-08-09 14:06:39
Dp: 13904
Status: published
Image: /img/header-4.jpg

While reading Pilot Wave theory from
[slides](http://www.tcm.phy.cam.ac.uk/~mdt26/PWT/lectures/bohm7.pdf) I thought a
*solution* to wave/particle duality. 

This is a philosophical view, so I will strip off the physical part: It's
actually a modified version of Many Worlds Hypothesis. In MWH we cannot explain
the connection between everyday physics and QM. When we have (possible infinite)
number of worlds where particles position themselves, some (or most) of these
worlds should have some *non-natural* phenomena like 500-year old people. We
can't see such *miracles* around, so there must be *something* that *kills* some
of these worlds. 

The solutions seems to me that there is some filtering mechanism that kills most
of these worlds. We cannot be sure that there are Many Worlds, as we belong only
one of them and we can't take one *world step* back and see how these Many
Worlds exist. But there may be a not-yet-discovered viable pattern of particles
and the rest of the worlds may died *instantly.* 

As an example suppose this: We have 10 particles each having 10 attributes, each
an integer. At each step, these 10 attributes change *randomly.* They may
increase or decrease by 10. Also from their nature, we cannot know all 10 of
these numbers. We can measure one of them but we cannot know the rest exactly. 

At each time step, we know that these numbers change. For each change, a
different set of particles are thought to be created. At each time step, each of
the 10 attributes of 10 particles are changed randomly and when the sum of these
100 attributes are divisible by 1000, that set of particles are kept and if not
thrown away.

Hence I believe there is a *sum of them are divisible by 1000* like rule to
filter out the non-natural. We may still have Many Worlds but these worlds would
all behave like ours.

