==========
Small Gods
==========

:date: 2014-11-23 02:18:14 +0200

.. :Author: Emin Reşah
.. :Date:   12852

Pratchett'in *Küçük Tanrılar* kitabı, kendisinden bitirdiğim ilk kitap.
Daha önce bu *Discworld* serisinden bir kitabı elime aldığımı
hatırlıyorum ama başka bir kitabın devamı olduğundan herhalde, pek
yürümemişti.

Kitap yer yer Ortaçağ, yer yer Antik göndermelerin bir *büyümek isteyen
küçük tanrılar* fikriyle karışmasından mürekkep. Kilise, peygamberlik,
*gerçek* ve sair konularda güzel bir konusu var. Kurgu çok çarpıcı
değil, zorlama kısımları var ancak bir fantastik kurgudan bu konuda
fazla beklentiye girmemiştim zaten.

Alıntılar
=========

Time is a drug. Too much of it kills you. (p. 3)

--------------

The trouble with being a god is that you’ve got no one to pray to. (p.
10)

--------------

They were merely at the top. The people who really run organizations are
usually found several levels down, where it’s still possible to get
things done. (p. 21)

--------------

how to conspire without actually uttering words to an untrusted possible
fellow conspirator which, if reported, would point the accusing red-hot
poker of guilt. (p. 38)

--------------

That on the whole, and by and large, if a man lived properly, not
according to what any priests said, but according to what seemed decent
and honest inside, then it would, at the end, more or less, turn out all
right. (p. 87)

--------------

Half the time you don’t know what you’re thinking, so why should I?” (p.
91)

--------------

So, reasoned Koomi, it was not a good idea to address any prayers to a
Supreme Being. It would only attract his attention and might cause
trouble. (p. 102)

--------------

There’s one of ’em that sits around playing a flute most of the time and
chasing milkmaids. I don’t call that very divine. Call that very divine?
I don’t.” (p. 120)

--------------

mean, it’s not as though any one else is likely to try to become a God
of Lettuce. (p. 121)

--------------

“Does what?” “Make a sound. If it falls down when no one’s there to hear
it.” “Who cares?” (p. 124)

--------------

“We’re philosophers. We think, therefore we am.” (p. 133)

--------------

As if the turning of sunlight into wine, by means of vines and grapes
and time and enzymes, wasn’t a thousand times more impressive and
happened all the time… (p. 141)

--------------

Then he found himself wishing his God was a more intelligent God so it
could answer. (p. 155)

--------------

“Well, they can if they want,” said Urn. “But no one comes in here much.
These aren’t books for reading. They’re more for writing.” (p. 162)

--------------

Not being certain is what being a philosopher is all about.” (p. 163)

--------------

They were sure all right. They were sure it wasn’t them in the pit. You
could see it in their faces. So glad it wasn’t them that they were
throwing just as hard as they could.” (p. 165)

--------------

“When the Great God is with us,” he said, “who can stand against us? You
impress me, Brutha.” (p. 173)

--------------

whenever you see a bunch of buggers puttering around talking about truth
and beauty and the best way of attacking Ethics, you can bet your
sandals it’s because dozens of other poor buggers are doing all the real
work around the place while those fellows are living like—” “—gods?” (p.
226)

--------------

The Omnian Church encouraged them, on the basis that it was best to get
madmen as far away as possible where they couldn’t cause any trouble and
could be cared for by the community, insofar as the community consisted
of lions and buzzards and dirt. (p. 257)

--------------

You can’t find a hermit to teach you herming (p. 258)

--------------

“Wisdom comes out of the wilderness, they say.” “Only the wisdom that
people want. And mushrooms.” (p. 262)

--------------

Killing the creator was a traditional method of patent-protection. (p.
292)

--------------

“It’s too soon!” Om yelled. “You need followers! It can’t be just you!
You can’t do it by yourself! You have to get disciples first!” (p. 296)

--------------

XIX. Hah! You Want A Constitutional Religion? (p. 310)

--------------

You can die for your country or your people or your family, but for a
god you should live fully and busily, every day of a long life.” (p.
311)

--------------

the way I see it, logic is only a way of being ignorant by numbers.” (p.
324)

--------------

“I like the idea of democracy. You have to have someone everyone
distrusts,” said Brutha. “That way, everyone’s happy. Think about it.
Simony?” (p. 333)
