---
title: "Excerpts from Suggestible You: The Curious Science of Your Brain's Ability to Deceive, Transform, and Heal (by Erik Vance)"
date: 2019-04-17 21:13:04
expiryDate: 2020-04-16 21:13:04
dp: 14521
featured_image: "/images/header-24.jpg"
images: ["/images/header-24.jpg"]
published: true
tags: []
---



### page 6

The practitioner began reassuring Dee, saying, “It doesn’t matter whether this
religion works or not. God loves your child.” Over the next couple of minutes,
everything changed for Dee. She let go of herself and put her trust in God. The
world was transformed from a place where her son was dying and her community was
helpless to save him into a world in which everything was perfect and God’s love
enveloped her family like a warm, comforting blanket. Dee walked into the next
room and saw what most people would describe as a miracle. Her child was sitting
up, happy in his father’s arms, his color returned, a smile on his face.

### page 7

Christian Science is an American religion founded in 1866. Its charismatic
founder, Mary Baker Eddy, claimed to have discovered the true meaning of
Scripture: that all Christians have the ability to heal, just as Jesus did.
Roughly speaking, Christian Scientists believe that all matter—your car, this
book, or a shot of antibiotic—is superseded by a deeper reality reflecting the
mind of God. In that reality, everyone and everything is perfect. Thus a healing
comes not by changing the body but through glimpsing a more perfect, truer
version of yourself.

### page 7

[M]ore than 2,000 Christian Scientists claim to have been spontaneously healed
of medically diagnosed conditions across the spectrum: polio, bone cancer,
ruptured appendixes, goiter, crossed eyes.

### page 11

These people aren’t lying, and they aren’t fooling themselves. Something else is
happening. Something was giving me the power to heal myself as a child.

### page 12

In 1996, the philosopher and artificial intelligence pioneer Daniel Dennett
wrote, “A mind is fundamentally an anticipator, an expectation-generator.”

### page 15

The world, it turns out, is not what it seems. More important, it’s not what we
expect it to be, and in that fact lies unimaginable power.

### page 17

Maybe physicians needed to find a cure that came in a package similar to the
disease itself. “Similia similibus curantur,” he said: Like cures like.

### page 18

Grams’s homeopath recommended belladonna, or deadly nightshade, a poisonous bush
used throughout history for political assassination.

### page 18

there is no scientific reason why deadly nightshade, let alone highly diluted
deadly nightshade, should have helped Grams’s panic disorder when prescription
drugs had failed. But it did: Her symptoms dissipated.

### page 19

But the more she dug into the scientific literature, the more she learned that
the homeopathic treatments she had been administering showed zero merit in
careful scientific tests.

### page 19

What’s going on here? Homeopathy improved the health of Grams, her patients, and
hundreds of thousands of other people and is one of the most popular forms of
alternative medicine in existence. How does it work so well if it’s not real?

### page 21

Around 1025, the legendary Persian doctor and mathematician Avicenna wrote his
Canon of Medicine, which lays out parameters for clinical tests of new drugs
that are surprisingly in sync with modern standards.

### page 21

Today’s laboratory experiments follow similar rules—except sadly we substitute
mice for lions. (Just imagine how much more interesting lab work would be.)

### page 23

Mesmer observed that, like the tides in the sea and the planets in the sky, the
human body was awash in magnetism. He reasoned that the same forces that drew
metal objects together created a sort of invisible “universally spread fluid”
that swirls around us (kind of like the Force from Star Wars).

### page 30

[Y]ou eating from the forbidden fruit of knowledge, so that the next time you
pop an Advil, you won’t feel anything until it kicks in? Never fear. Classical
conditioning happens largely on an unconscious level. You can no more prevent
your placebo response than Pavlov’s puppy can keep from drooling. This has even
been shown in the laboratory.

### page 30

This theater plays out in thousands of ways. For instance, depression patients
respond better to yellow placebo pills than to blue ones. Bigger ones work
better than smaller ones, but only to a certain point (at which the pill is just
too big to believe, I suppose). Fake injections work better than fake pills. And
if you’re French, suppositories work better than either. Take a quiet moment to
ponder the significance of that.

### page 34

Soon drug testing would have to be 1. randomized (distributed to patients
randomly), 2. double-blind (neither patients nor doctors would know who got
what), and 3. placebo-controlled (shown to be more effective than a placebo).

### page 38

For the first time in history there was a law stating that, to be allowed on the
market, a drug had to beat something. From here on, every new pharmaceutical now
has to be measured against the effect of a placebo treatment.

### page 39

Because placebos are still largely viewed as a nuisance—a bizarre psychological
reaction that affects weak and gullible people and keeps the real patients from
getting the drugs that they need. But today that view is radically changing. The
only way we have to separate an effective

### page 43

Placebos and expectation are part of all medicine. They kick in the moment we
swallow that pill and the moment we step into the doctor’s office and see that
white coat. None of us is immune to it, and those who fall under its spell
aren’t weak or gullible. This is who we are.

### page 48

But every time I saw the green screen, I swear I felt less pain. A lot less. I’m
not an idiot—I can tell the difference between a pinprick and squeezing fire.

### page 49

In real life, placebo responses can be triggered by many things—the desire to
please a doctor, for instance, or just to get better.

### page 56

What he saw was backward, with the pain signals starting in the prefrontal
cortex—the most advanced logic center of the brain—and working back to the more
primitive regions. This seemed to suggest a sort of collision of information:
half originating in the body as pain, and half originating in the advanced part
of the brain as expectation. And whatever comes out of that collision is what
you feel.

### page 57

Enter one of my favorite placebo treatments, acupuncture. As with so many forms
of folk medicine, acupuncture doesn’t reliably outperform a placebo. When it
does, it’s for especially placebo-prone conditions like pain or nausea. But
although acupuncture doesn’t often outperform placebos, it still performs really
well, and many respected scientists are not yet ready to label it strictly brain
chemistry. Ted Kaptchuk even found that the brain’s response to acupuncture is
markedly different than it is to other placebos. It performs so well, it seems
to be in its own class of placebo.

### page 59

What if acupuncture is an active placebo? What if that tingling sensation in my
nerves and pain in my muscles is a message to my brain that this exercise with
needles is doing something? That would explain why it performs so well in
trials, yet not well enough to reliably beat placebos.

### page 61

Parkinson’s disease is a somewhat mysterious and incurable condition whereby
neurons deep in the brain responsible for generating dopamine die. Why they die
isn’t clear, but since dopamine is so important for movement, patients are
increasingly unable to walk, stand, or hold a pen without shaking.

### page 65

People, it seems, are programmed with a preexisting need to go with the herd. In
an instant, people tapped into a more powerful placebo response than if they had
spent hours conditioning themselves. Let that sink in for a second. Someone
else’s opinion is not only powerful, it can be more powerful than your own. It
can be more powerful than your experience and even more powerful than repeated
conditioning. We are hardwired to follow other people’s opinions.

### page 67

Thus began a bizarre dual health care system that continues in China to this
day. On one side is Western medicine with its MRIs, morphine, surgeries, and so
on. On the other is TCM, which treats patients with acupuncture, herbs, animal
parts, and massage. Just like conventional medicine, TCM has its own hospitals
and drugstores; its students go through extensive schooling (though it’s usually
not as long as that of their Western-medicine counterparts).

### page 67

Every remedy that has ever been used in TCM—from ginseng to rhinoceros horn to
mercury—is theoretically just as valid today as it ever was. In other words,
evidence is not the primary driver.

### page 68

“In Chinese medicine we don’t have ‘bacteria.’ We don’t have this word. We don’t
have ‘virus.’ We consider maybe this is the chi or the blood movement,” she
says. “For Chinese medicine, what we adjust is chi, blood, the yin and the
yang.”

### page 68

Modern science cannot measure yin or yang, the Chinese complementary feminine
and masculine principles, and no serious scientists—East or West—have been able
to demonstrate the existence of chi.

### page 68

A person’s chi, their vital energy, can change with the seasons, the time of
day, and a hundred other things. When I ask her how she can prove this, she
points to tradition. Over thousands of years TCM has been honed by millions of
physicians, evolving naturally over time to where it is today. As with
homeopathy, TCM has a coherent story to tell that works perfectly within its own
logic but contradicts biology and physics. And as with homeopathic remedies, TCM
treatments are often as much about the description of the pain as the
physiology.

### page 69

For Zhang, the point of the story is that the chemicals in, say, ginseng or deer
antler are not as important as the intangible, ineffable quality of the healer.
There are many roads, she says, but the destination is the same.

### page 70

Sitting there drinking my third pot of tea, all this starts to sound very
familiar. I am reminded for a moment of my parents and their community of faith
healers in California. “What you are describing is religion,”

### page 70

Zhang says that Western medicine is a straight line—always refining itself,
always moving forward—while Chinese medicine is a circle around a fixed dot. The
fundamentals never change, just your interpretations of them.

### page 71

According to the theory of Chinese medicine, you can tell a lot about your
health by looking at your foot. Each muscle is tied to an organ in the body
through meridians, or energy highways. Because the feet and toes are farthest
from the heart, they are seen as good diagnostic tools—the 10 little piggies in
the coal mine, if you will.

### page 71

There is no physiological mechanism by which the foot could tell you something
about the urinary tract. But that doesn’t bother Wang. He’s happy in his
practice and knows he’s helping people (though my arm pain is no better after
seeing him). When I ask him how he can be so sure that his work is effective, he
has a simple, familiar response: “For so many thousands of years the Chinese
people have been the most populous on the Earth, and they have all gone to
Chinese medicine to cure their illnesses. How can we doubt it?”

### page 73

Outsiders often wonder how people can stay connected to a faith like
this—thinking, “Eventually, won’t they naturally drift toward solutions that are
reinforced by success?” But Christian Science, like TCM, is being reinforced.
Humans aren’t stupid. Like everyone, Christian Scientists are trying to put
their faith in treatments that work. The results can be stunning. I’ve seen
Christian Science heal people of lifelong pain. I watched my grandmother
collapse and then recover after my father held her and whispered song lyrics to
her. I’ve also seen it fail. One member of our community had cataracts for many
years, which easily could have been treated by an eye surgeon.

### page 75

Gene therapy—the notion that you can tinker directly with the genes of ailing
human cells—has held tremendous promise for many years. But like stem cell
therapy, cold fusion, and reboots of The Muppet Show, it’s beginning to look
like a breakthrough that’s never going to happen.

### page 76

This may seem cruel to you and me, but Parkinson’s is a devious disease. One of
the reasons it has been so hard to cure is that it seems to respond more to
placebo treatments than other degenerative brain ailments do.

### page 78

After the call, she got the details of the study, and what she saw stopped her
cold. Pauletich had been in the placebo group.

### page 78

The problem of placebo responders is the central challenge to modern medicine.
The placebo response not only has the power to kill a proposed drug that doesn’t
work; it also has the power to block one that does.

### page 79

The development of Prozac was bedeviled by high placebo rates that made it hard
to tell if it worked. It obviously made it to your pharmacist’s shelf, but
nowadays many scientists say it is not effective enough to outperform placebos.
(It’s still on the market because once a drug clears the FDA, it cannot be
recalled just because the placebo effect gets stronger.)

### page 80

One unpleasant 1961 paper written in Louisiana declared that African Americans
were particularly vulnerable to placebos, according to one unaffiliated
scientist, because of a “prevalent attitude amongst the negroes to please their
doctor.”

### page 81

In the past couple of decades, scientists have shifted to a theory called
dispositional optimism, or the measure of how glass-half-full you are as a
possible measure of how placebo prone you are.

### page 82

When she says she once dabbled in a Reiki-like form of aura cleansing and even
cured herself of carpal tunnel syndrome through acupuncture, I categorize her as
a well-meaning hippie on a quest to undermine the big bad pharmaceutical
industry.

### page 87

Met/mets—those people who were born with lazy enzymes and a little too much
dopamine in their systems—were more prone to placebo responses.

### page 87

The concept makes great evolutionary sense as well. Just as it’s good to have
some members of a population who are stronger, faster, or smarter than others,
it’s probably good to have varying levels of suggestibility. Some people need to
be clear-eyed and unmoved, like the val/vals. But nature thrives on variety and
has given us an equal number of suggestible people who have an extraordinary
genetic tool that allows them to heal themselves.

### page 90

It’s a crack in the wall that suggests a reason why some people seem to respond
to one placebo and not another, why the placebo response can seem so clear in
one person and not in another, and why it seems vaguely related to personality
and at the same time totally divorced from it. Homeopathy patients, Christian
Scientists, TCM—suddenly all these phenomena make more sense. What if the reason
some people experience such relief from prayer healing and unproven therapies
while others don’t is that they simply have different genetic maps for
self-medication?

### page 92

Winkler says each person enrolled in an experiment ends up costing the company a
shocking $30,000, including time and resources. Considering that even a minimal
“proof of concept” study—to prove that a drug is even worth the effort of
testing—requires hundreds of subjects, costs can accumulate quickly.

### page 93

when this company went back through its data and screened out met/mets, it
found, lo and behold, the COMT gene would have predicted who was going to
eventually respond to the placebos in the trial. All because of a single rung on
a single strand of DNA.

### page 94

After thousands of years, the placebo response isn’t going anywhere. It’s
hardwired into who we are on a neurochemical level. And after decades of
searching for the perfect placebo responder, scientists have finally admitted
that they may never be able to separate him or her from the rest of humanity.

### page 94

All things considered, they are actually the most fortunate members of the
population. They can take the drug and they will respond at a higher level than
the recalcitrant val/vals. Or, if they decide that conventional medicine isn’t
their thing, they can try acupuncture, homeopathy, or faith healing and perhaps
do just as well—whereas on a val/val, those treatments are more likely to fall
flat.

### page 96

“It’s not ‘telling yourself.’ You can’t fool yourself. You have to believe that
you have control over it. That the disease is not going to take control of you,
that you are going to take control of it,” he says. “It’s a difference between
belief and hope. At some point there’s a switch between ‘I hope I’m going to get
better’ and ‘I know I can defeat this.’ ”

### page 97

For instance, cancer historically has not responded well to placebo treatments,
yet plenty of dubious treatments have claimed to cure the disease. Are they all
hokum, or is there perhaps some yet-to-be-discovered mechanism by which the mind
can affect a cancerous tumor?

### page 100

Recall that placebo is Latin for “I shall please”; nocebo means “I shall harm.”

### page 101

(Generally a shot of salt water is considered inert—the injected version of a
sugar pill. However, some scientists have argued that saline shots can cure back
pain, and many doctors even use them as therapy. If this is true, it would
basically invalidate every study that has used saline as a placebo.)

### page 101

For instance, some studies suggest that the nocebo response is less an active
process than simply the experience of pain without the buffer of a placebo
response.

### page 102

Consider the so-called second-year syndrome, whereby medical students become
convinced they have all the diseases they are studying. Have you ever heard of
it working the other way: students being convinced they’re being cured by the
various treatments they are studying?

### page 105

Mackey says the cutting edge of pain research is trying to understand what makes
one person vulnerable and another person resilient to these deep, powerful
danger signals. Of course, we can’t spot those vulnerable to chronic pain any
more than we can spot those prone to having placebo responses.

### page 105

At first, it was distractingly painful. As I lay there, he told me to think of
this horrible burning thing on my arm as nothing more than sunlight warmly
caressing my skin. Sure enough, I watched as a part of my brain involved in pain
(in that case, the anterior cingulate cortex, a couple of inches behind the left
side of my forehead) slowly ramped down.

### page 106

Does this mean that chronic pain, fibromyalgia, and neuralgia are nothing but
elaborate nocebos?

### page 107

Colloca feels that a doctor should never say “Don’t worry” to a patient. Of
course the patient is worried! Telling her what not to do just makes it worse.
Instead, the doctor should address those fears and come up with novel ways to
frame the dangers. The doctor who approaches a patient with straightforward,
positive language (“Here is what is happening to you, and here is what we are
going to do about it”) stands a better chance of fighting off potential nocebo
effects

### page 109

Most men speak at around 120 hertz (which measures the frequency, or pitch, of a
sound), and women at around 210 hertz. The lowest Barry White sings is about 90
hertz. Most humans can’t hear anything below 20 hertz.*

### page 109

Some researchers have observed that we can subconsciously detect sounds below
this level, translating them into a vague sense of anxiety or awe, but it’s not
clear whether this is true.

### page 112

What are the limits of negative expectation? According to Cannon, there are
none. He hypothesized that it was possible for someone to become so agitated, so
frightened, that she could literally die from it. He was convinced that if that
happened, it would appear in communities that believe in the power of black
magic.

### page 112

People who consider themselves at risk for heart disease die four times more
often than similarly healthy people who don’t think they’re at risk.

### page 112

And certainly people with cancer who have a dim outlook on their future don’t
live as long as optimistic patients. But killing an otherwise healthy young
person with just suggestion?

### page 114

“Mental malpractice,” as it was called, was the act of wishing someone ill and
thus causing him to get ill, or worse. In other words, a Christian Science
version of a curse.

### page 114

This means blocking all aggressive thoughts, either free-floating or targeted by
someone who wished me ill. I didn’t fully understand it at the time, but it made
a pretty powerful impression on a little kid. Whenever I got sick, I spent a
fair amount of time imagining British Queen’s Guards standing inside my ears,
just in case.

## page 114

Almost every culture on earth has its own language of curses. Hexes, bad juju,
demons, djinn, black magic—when you get sick, it has never been hard to find
someone to blame. To be clear, a curse is not a nocebo. But if you believe
you’ve been cursed, the nocebo effect certainly plays a role in any resulting
changes to your health.

### page 115

The first is that bokors use puffer fish venom to simulate death. Then the lack
of oxygen from the time spent buried in a wooden boxed causes brain damage and
that telltale shuffle. The second explanation is much more fascinating. Some
have suggested that the tremendous cultural pressure to become a zombie after
being knocked out and buried might have actually forced the poor wretch to turn
himself into a shuffling creature of scorn. In other words, zombies could be
self-made, molded from the collective will of a community—a massive, societal
negative expectation fulfilled.

### page 117

They rely on the fact that—as should be evident by this point—we are not always
rational creatures. If we were all equipped with perfectly logical minds, we
would see that the number of bad things happening to people who’ve been cursed
is the same as the number of bad things happening to everyone else.

### page 119

Valadez says that the ingredients of his treatments are important but not the
most crucial part of his work. “Nothing in this works if you don’t have faith.
Faith is like the engine,” he tells me.

### page 121

No, the real power of a curse is to give cause to a bad event—to give me someone
to blame. In this case, myself. That’s how quickly a man of science can turn to
superstition. Whether it’s a curse or a blessing, the power of belief comes from
two little words: What if? What if that blessing could have helped me get the
job I wanted? What if that ex-girlfriend I cheated on five years ago decided to
curse me?

### page 122

On that Sunday in June—my first Father’s Day—I feel anything but cursed.

### page 122

But one type of story is even more powerful at harnessing our expectation than
either placebos or nocebos. So powerful that with just a few spoken words, it
can erase pain, memories, and even disfiguring skin diseases. So powerful, in
fact, it’s hard to argue that it’s not magic.

### page 123

Hypnosis has inspired scientists and snake oil salesmen alike for centuries, and
it holds fascinating clues into the world of suggestion and expectation in the
brain. It’s a powerful, tangible phenomenon that has cured addiction, erased
pain, and brought comfort to millions.

### page 124

Experts who study what happens during hypnosis fall into two loose camps. One
group asserts that hypnosis is a form of intense focus, like daydreaming or
getting lost in a good book or jigsaw puzzle. For many people, that’s all
hypnosis is: a nice relaxing meditation, a little like the end of a yoga
session, when everybody gets to lie down and focus on breathing. For them,
hypnosis is like lying in the grass on a sunny spring day, staring into a cloud
so intently that you momentarily lose yourself in it. It’s not a state
unfamiliar to real life. For others, hypnosis can be much, much more. The second
group of scientists considers it an “altered state,” having no counterpart in
daily life. Some people under hypnosis commune with the dead, revisit their
past, and perform superhuman feats. Warts disappear from their skin, and they
feel no pain when surgeons slice into them. 

### page 125

The novelist and poet Sir Walter Scott referenced it in 1805, noting that
Gypsies among certain rural Scottish communities had “the power of throwing upon
bystanders a spell to fascinate their eyes and cause them to see the thing that
is not.”

### page 128

Eddy wasn’t alone. Most orthodox Christians and Muslims eventually rejected and
continue to reject hypnosis as a tool of Satan or supernatural creatures called
djinn.

### page 128

Interestingly, in Bram Stoker’s 1897 novel Dracula, it was the hero who used
hypnosis to find the vampire. But by the time the various movie versions came
along, it was always the bloodsucker himself who hypnotized his victims.

### page 130

Mason noted that this poor kid, who was once “lonely, solitary, with a hopeless
attitude towards future friendship and employment,” suddenly became a “happy,
normal boy” who went on to become an electrician’s assistant and then a bike
mechanic with no sign of relapse. Had it been a priest performing the hypnosis
and not a doctor, it would be enough to make a person believe in God (or devise
some wild explanation involving magnets). But amazing as this account is, it
hasn’t inspired the kind of research it deserves. Over the next half century,
medical science came only marginally closer to understanding the potential power
of hypnosis to heal.

### page 131

Contrary to Hollywood portrayals, the most spectacular forms of hypnosis work
only on the most hypnotizable 10 percent or so of the population. Another 10
percent don’t respond to hypnosis at all, and the rest fall somewhere in
between.

### page 132

Another controversial theory from the 1970s ties hypnotizability to how much
white is visible around your iris when you roll your eyes up.

### page 135

Different performers have different tricks, but the key is to get the audience
to act as one: Get them to stand up and then sit down on your command. Get them
to laugh together.

### page 135

We can’t help it; we want to be a part of the crowd. By signaling to the
audience that he is their leader, Newton primes them to obey his suggestions.
When it’s really working, he says, the hypnotist is even more amazed than the
audience.

### page 136

Newton tends to see hypnotists everywhere around him—for instance, in military
parades where soldiers march in lockstep and onlookers cheer on cue. He says one
of the best hypnotists he’s ever seen is Tony Robbins, perhaps the world’s most
famous motivational speaker, celebrated for his boundless energy and rock
star–like persona. Robbins has a dedicated, almost cultlike following.
Participants of his seminars often report feeling energized and ready to change
their life afterward. Newton says it’s not hard to spot his secret.

### page 137

Many religions, from Christianity to Sufism to Buddhism, employ some form of
group trance (which is ironic, since many religions lump hypnosis in with
satanic or occult practices). Singing, dancing, and chanting in unison, be they
for healing or simply for getting in touch with a higher power, rely on the
element of trance. And although it’s true they can be used to manipulate people,
trances (whether in a group or all alone) can also open a portal through which
we can tinker with our expectations. In addition to being a fun stage trick,
hypnosis can be a powerful tool for healing.

### page 141

Amazingly, even with all these barriers, when scientists listen to multiple
places in the brain, a neurological picture of hypnosis begins to emerge. For
instance, although to people experiencing them meditation and hypnosis can feel
very similar, they create very different scenarios. The “stadium chant” that
many parts of your brain participate in during meditation is measurably slower
than in daily life. And with hypnosis, it becomes even slower. About the only
way to get brain rhythms slower than those during hypnosis would be to fall into
a coma.

### page 143

If Jensen is right, his research will back up much of what scientists have
suspected for many years: Hypnosis is not a placebo or a trick of the mind that
releases the brain’s inner medicine cabinet. And it’s not akin to distraction,
which uses the brain’s need to focus as a way to cloak the pain. By this line of
reasoning, hypnosis may be an exotic brain state that directly accesses
expectation and perception—a little like turning off all the software in your
computer and accessing its basic coding.

### page 145

His logic seems not to go anywhere yet continues forward, spinning around
itself, repeating ideas while moving in no particular direction. I have trouble
tracking it, which is the point, since I soon start to relax.

### page 145

For centuries, people assumed that those who easily fall into trances are
somehow gullible. But Jensen flips that observation on its end. He thinks highly
hypnotizable people are not only skilled but also “talented.”

### page 146

“What are you telling yourself about yourself? If you have more hypnotic talent,
our hypothesis is that the things you tell yourself are more strongly
impactful.”

### page 146

Try it: Close your eyes, lift your hand off the table or your leg, and then
slowly—ever, ever so slowly—lower it back down. Chances are that you will think
your arm should have touched down long before it actually does. This, it turns
out, is a big part of hypnosis: using tricks to create the sense that you are
hypnotized, so that soon enough, you are.

### page 148

For now, the track record for digital hypnosis still lags behind that
administered by a real person. But without a doubt, digital hypnosis is coming.

### page 150

IN MARCH 1988, RESIDENTS OF THE SMALL TOWN of Stuart, Florida, were gripped by
what can only be described as mass hysteria. Law enforcement officers had
discovered a secret satanic cult being run out of the local Montessori
preschool.

### page 150

There were tales of dark hooded figures, bizarre blood ceremonies, and the
ritualistic rape of children.

### page 151

[W]e’ve learned, you can’t make people do something against their will under
hypnosis, but a subject can become highly suggestible.

### page 152

Then, while living in San Francisco in her 20s, she decided to experiment with a
sensory-deprivation tank—a chamber half filled with tepid water and impervious
to sound or light. Crawl into one and you feel as if you are floating silently
in the blackest space. For decades, people have used this extreme sort of quiet
blackness as a sort of forced meditation.

### page 152

scientists understand that what caused a nationwide panic and the imprisonment
of dozens of people wasn’t a conspiracy of pedophiles but an interesting glitch
in the human mind: specifically, how we create memories.

### page 154

Broadly speaking, your memories are created in three stages: encoding,
consolidation, and retrieval.

### page 154

Encoding happens just as an event is occurring—that moment when you find
yourself paying attention to something.

### page 154

At the end of the day, your mind sifts through all the memories it’s made that
day (where my keys were before I left the house; whether that was a chickadee or
a nuthatch), and moves only the important ones (my moronic roommate accidentally
lit the kitchen on fire) into long-term memory.

### page 154

The last step in creating memories is retrieval—that moment when you actually
remember something. But wait, you might say, retrieving a memory is completely
different from creating one.

### page 154

Memory isn’t static like photos. It’s more like reassembling a picture from
jigsaw pieces or making a photocopy of a picture and then looking at it.

### page 158

[W]hen you try to go back in time, your mind simply fills in the blanks with
something that seems right, given the story it’s trying to construct. We all
have memories like this—things we’re sure about and that we can see with our
eyes closed—that just aren’t true.

### page 161

Although repressed memories certainly could exist in theory (and indeed
“dissociative amnesia,” its technical name, is still listed in the latest
version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders), they are
difficult to study in the laboratory, and some experts assert that they don’t
exist at all.

### page 162

It’s not clear how many innocent people are currently in prison because of
false-memory testimony, but every year counties and states occasionally quietly
release supposed child molesters who have spent decades in prison based on the
testimony of hypnotized children.

### page 163

Scientists have been able to paint a rich picture of how false memories might
function in the brain. They can form at any stage of memory making: during the
initial encoding; during the consolidation into long-term memory; and during
retrieval of the memory days, months, or years later. We know that in some
people false memories can be just as powerful and even longer lasting than real
memories.

### page 165

(Most lie detectors rely on subtle physiological changes—eye movement, pulse,
skin conductance—triggered by the knowledge that a person is lying. These
triggers disappear when the subject doesn’t know he’s lying.)

### page 166

In 2015, a Spanish team, in a conclusion that will surprise no one, found that
cannabis use encourages false memories. But what was surprising was that even
after people stopped smoking weed, they remained prone to creating false
memories, suggesting some kind of long-term changes to the brain’s medial
temporal lobe as a result of regular marijuana use. A similar effect, though
perhaps in a different brain region, probably exists as a result of sleep
deprivation.

### page 166

And we know that no matter how immune we may think we are, anyone can have one.
In one study, even people with the disorder hyperthymesia, which causes them to
remember every event in their lives in painstaking detail, were susceptible to
false memories at roughly the same rate as the rest of us.

### page 168

How can you understand false memories if there is a chance that some of the
memories you are studying are true? So he turned to the next logical place to
conduct memory research—little green men from outer space.

### page 168

the nearest planet we have found to date that could sustain life, called Wolf
1061c, is 13.8 light-years away. For a creature living there to visit us, it
would have to break almost every law of physics and still endure an extremely
long trip. It’s a fair bet that after such a grueling journey, the last thing a
space creature would want to do is quietly pick someone out of their bed and
extract semen or eggs.

### page 170

He also noticed that the people who “remembered” satanic cults never overlapped
with those who said they’d experienced alien abduction, and vice versa. If you
were setting out to find alien abductees through hypnosis, wouldn’t it make
sense that you’d find at least a few satanic-ritual survivors?

### page 172

In the end, we can’t always trust what our memories are telling us. But that
knowledge in itself can be powerful. Once you understand that people’s memories
are less videotape and more extended personal narrative, the world begins to
make a little more sense. Autobiographies cease to be absolute truth and turn
more to “some stuff that happened mixed with some stuff that probably didn’t.”

### page 174

Children and the mentally handicapped are victims of an unusually high number of
assaults, partly because they make such terrible witnesses. What if sexual
predators could target people prone to false memories? And several studies have
suggested that women are more prone to memory errors than men are, providing an
opportunity to discredit half the population. Is society ready for that kind of
information?

### page 175

What if that foundational memory isn’t real? What does that make me? As with all
forms of suggestion, false memories remind us that our perception of reality is
fallible. Just as most of us are susceptible to placebos and some level of
hypnosis, so too do we have to realize that not everything we think happened
actually did. We are all vulnerable to suggestive storytelling that fits our own
expectations. And if we are unable to see these memories as fallible, the
consequences can be disastrous.

### page 177

And although it’s true that being kidnapped by aliens or fed blood by satanists
may seem like bizarre narratives, all one has to do is turn on the television to
see that, in the modern world, we’re frequently exposed to such stories. Strange
as it may seem, for some of us, the notion that a creature traveled 13
light-years to collect our semen is easier to accept than the idea that our
memories cannot be trusted.

### page 179

Among the first to lay out this proposition was a British team of researchers
who wrote in 2003 that “thinking of the future is closely related to
retrospective memory.” They found that imagining the future and remembering the
past use similar networks—kind of like how two roommates will frequent the same
restaurants.

### page 181

Neuroscientists admit that if a bottle of wine is clearly bad—Welch’s grape
juice or nearly vinegar—people won’t be duped into thinking it’s a fine vintage.
Expectation is an extraordinary force, but it can go only so far.

### page 181

Most companies achieve this in one of two ways: Either they spend a fortune
creating, cultivating, and enhancing a particular brand, or they just use a good
old-fashioned price tag. For example, if a company tells you it has a new line
of brain-enhancing drinks—which, I shouldn’t even have to tell you, is just
flavored water—and you take a series of cognitive tests after imbibing, you’ll
find that your cognitive performance actually improves.

### page 182

studies suggest that athletes perform better when they drink flavored water out
of a Gatorade bottle. And amazingly, students’ test scores rise when they use a
pen labeled “MIT.”

### page 182

Interestingly, those who thought of intelligence as more or less fixed—and thus
perhaps intent on proving themselves—were more suggestible to brands than those
who saw intelligence as more fluid. In other words, if you’re the type of person
who considers intelligence to be a malleable idea—that everyone has the capacity
to be brilliant in their own way—then you may be less malleable to the power of
marketing suggestions.

### page 183

Which brings me to another part of our daily lives that scientists now say is
all about suggestion. Namely, our ever expanding waistlines. In the same way
that our instinctual fears, which protected our ancestors for millions of years,
can get out of control and create nocebos that affect our bodies, so, too, can
our ancient need for sweet and fattening food get us in trouble in the modern
world. A 2015 Finnish study showed that obesity is tied to the number of opioid
receptors in the brain (drug addicts, as we will see, often have a similar
problem, except with dopamine receptors).† In other words, with fewer
opportunities for pleasure-related endorphins, some people seek out more
pleasurable experiences like eating. It’s not that addiction and overeating are
the same thing; it’s just that they manifest in very similar ways.

### page 184

Scientists have discovered a fascinating web of interconnected chemicals that
link your brain and your belly, many of which may harness placebo-like effects
when you start that new fad diet or that all-fruit purge.

### page 184

Free radicals—extra ions floating in your bloodstream—are in some ways as
natural as pomegranate juice and are an important part of your body’s
functioning. It’s true that if they get too plentiful, they can lead to cancer,
but the same would be true if they got too scarce. And it’s certainly not clear
that drinking smoothies can somehow eradicate free radicals and protect you from
cancer.

### page 184

Any diet or form of exercise that claims to make you healthy by purging toxins
is just playing with your suggestibility. Evil free radicals and toxins are just
stories. We buy them or we don’t.

### page 186

Ghrelin is a fascinating little hormone that our stomach secretes to tell us we
are hungry. It also seems to play a role in monitoring how energy is absorbed in
the body. But notice that all these things start in the body, not the mind. The
stomach tells the brain when it’s hungry, not the other way around. Ghrelin
tapers off after we eat and we are no longer hungry because the stomach is full.
But Crum found that sometimes the process can work in reverse. When she told
subjects she was giving them a fattening shake, their ghrelin levels were far
lower than those of the people who thought they were getting a diet shake.
Remember, everyone got the same shake—the only difference was expectation.

### page 187

Or maybe you don’t even need a diet. Maybe a little perspective is enough to
give you a healthier lifestyle. “It’s not just what you’re doing; it’s how
you’re thinking about what you’re doing,” Crum says. “And what sort of mindsets
or expectations you have that encapsulate those things.”

### page 188

Next, she took half the maids and gave them a short tutorial that explained the
value of their work as exercise, citing that they actually got well more daily
activity than the surgeon general recommends. A month later, she revisited both
groups; those who had received the tutorial experienced a significant weight
loss and drop in blood pressure when compared with their co-workers. They also
had more energy after work and a new outlook on the work they did.

### page 189

The easier experience confirmed the participants’ expectation about the pills
and nearly doubled the amount of actual weight they could lift. Similar studies
have played with fake steroids, supplements, oxygenated water, amino acids, and
even sodium bicarbonate, which goes by the street name “baking soda.”

### page 190

So how are these people increasing their performance? Although these are not
professional athletes, they are serious about their sports, and even a 12
percent enhancement is tough to explain, let alone 50 percent. It could be that
there is a not-yet-understood mechanism at work that is actually building
strength-boosting red blood cells.

### page 191

Addiction was once viewed as a moral failing or a lack of willpower, but today
we understand it as mostly physiological, specifically around our old friend
dopamine (which isn’t surprising, since the neurotransmitter deals with
anticipation and enjoyment of rewards). That can mean sugar, sex, money, a high
score on Grand Theft Auto—or using drugs.

### page 193

Multiple studies have shown that people who think they’re drinking booze but are
actually drinking a nonalcoholic brew feel just as drunk as those

### page 193

Multiple studies have shown that people who think they’re drinking booze but are
actually drinking a nonalcoholic brew feel just as drunk as those drinking the
real stuff—at least for a couple drinks.

### page 193

Those who drank beer actually absorbed more alcohol into their blood than those
who thought they were drinking soda but were in fact consuming just as much
alcohol—almost as if the beer drinkers’ bodies were absorbing booze partly
because they expected to.

### page 194

First she trains the patient to expect pain relief when taking a pill. Then she
takes the pill away and lets the patient’s own expectation cover the pain
relief, just as she did with me in that electrocution chair. Rather than
becoming dependent on the drug, which would lessen the effect of the internal
pharmacy, the patient uses her expectation to switch from an external drug to an
internal one.

### page 195

Depression isn’t a sadder version of you; it’s a whole different you. The best
way to describe it is like being chemically sedated into someone you don’t
recognize. Because, in a way, you are. I’ve never been clinically depressed, but
I know enough about brain chemistry to say that, given the choice, I might
prefer excruciating chronic pain.

### page 195

Some 7 percent of Americans will experience clinical depression this year,
costing the United States more than $200 billion.

### page 195

In fact, placebos and expectation are so effective against depression that it is
difficult to find a drug that’s more powerful. From 1987 to 1999 the
pharmaceutical industry exploded with depression meds like Prozac, Paxil,
Zoloft, Luvox, and Celexa—each of which has become a blockbuster drug and
presumably helped millions of suffering people. But if you look at drug studies
during this time, about 75 to 80 percent of their efficacy can be attributed to
placebo effects. And if you look carefully, there was no real difference between
high doses and low doses, which is odd and suggests the meds weren’t as
effective as we thought. (Usually, for a truly effective drug, you would expect
a difference. Imagine a high dose of morphine versus a small one.) What’s more,
these effects seem to be long-lived—for weeks and months even. It didn’t do any
good to exclude placebo responders in the first few weeks; others just filled
their place. This high placebo response has been one of the main reasons why
depression has been so difficult and expensive to treat.

### page 196

Some experts even say that if Prozac had to compete against the placebo effect
today, it would not have been cleared by the FDA.

### page 198

Scientists have studied how dopamine can crash in lovers who stay together long
periods of time without maintaining their relationship.

### page 198

Thus was born sildenafil citrate, more commonly known as Viagra. It hit the
market in 1997, and almost overnight erectile dysfunction was cured in all but
the most serious cases. Never before had an entire class of ancient herbal and
alternative treatments become so obsolete so quickly.

### page 198

The placebo group had about a 20 percent success rate as soon as they popped the
pill and about 50 percent if they persisted. Even men with erectile dysfunction
resulting from spinal injury have been able to have sex after taking a placebo.

### page 199

Conversely, one study revealed that if you tell someone that the drug he’s
taking will cause erectile dysfunction, loss of libido, or ejaculation problems,
he’s three times as likely to experience one of those problems as a man taking
the same drug who was not given one of those assessments.

### page 199

Perhaps some historical fertility cures—rosemary, parsley, and hazelnut—do
indeed have some as-yet-undiscovered mechanism, some pharmacological value.
Perhaps it’s just a numbers game. The more time that goes by while a couple
tries various remedies, the more likely that they will get pregnant. Or perhaps
there is something more. 

### page 201

Having seen and heard about many healings as a boy, I noticed that the stories
became more dramatic as time went on. Recoveries became instant recoveries. A
doctor with a frank diagnosis became a doctor who had given up all hope. A
particularly low point in the disease became a deathbed. Healing became a
miracle.

### page 203

But that didn’t stop health gurus from picking it up. The most notable was Dr.
Oz, who called it a “miracle pill.” It’s not the first time he’s held up snake
oil as medicine (a Canadian study showed that fewer than half his
recommendations are backed up, and 14 percent are actually contradicted, by
science), but it did force him to admit to Congress that on his show, he’s an
entertainer, not a doctor. 

### page 204

Generally, “maintaining” means lots of affectionate and sexual touching. Without
that, the dopamine spike tends to drop over time as part of something called the
Coolidge effect. The best way to bring it up to its original level is to bring
in a new mate (the effect exists in both sexes but is stronger in men). The
effect is named for President Calvin Coolidge, whose wife supposedly once noted
to him how much sex roosters have. He responded that a rooster has more than one
hen to choose from. 

### page 206

Three thousand years ago, people gathered in sacred spaces to chant themselves
into a hypnotic state. They rubbed dung on open wounds and mixed potent herbs
with inert ones, hoping that one of them would cure their diseases. They told
stories that became ever more improbable.

### page 206

Perhaps we should stop acting as if there is some kind of line between the mind
and the body. In the same way that placebos can be as powerful as drugs or a few
hypnotic words can erase real pain, any disease that cripples a person, whether
it begins in the body or the mind, is absolutely real.

### page 206

The first thing University of Washington researcher David Patterson did when he
tried to hypnotize me was get to know my personal history.

### page 207

It wasn’t that he thought my dad’s arm pain was connected to mine; he just
needed a story that resonated with me and thus tapped into my belief and
expectation.

### page 207

A few years ago, some supplement makers got into hot water because tests
revealed that their garlic pills turned out to contain not garlic but rice
powder. The pills were having the same placebo effect as before, but somehow
consumers felt cheated. I can’t resolve this paradox any more than I can explain
it. Con men have been with us since the time of Hippocrates, and a part of us
has hated them for their ability to trick us—even if it’s for our own good.

### page 208

Rule #1: Don’t endanger yourself. Some alternative health remedies are
physically dangerous. Mercury is a poison, chiropractic treatment can seriously
damage your spine, and a careless hypnotist can implant terrifying memories that
may not be yours.

### page 208

In early 2015, the New York State attorney general investigated a few of the
plant supplements for sale at GNC, Target, Walgreens, and Walmart. Forty-five
percent of the pills contained no plant matter at all; 33 percent contained
something different from what was on the label; and just 22 percent actually
tested positive for the plant that was supposed to be in the bottle.

### page 208

if you think you might be suggestible, try combining mainstream medicine with
alternative therapies to treat the pain, nausea, or depression that might
accompany either a disease or its treatment. But as soon as your shaman,
homeopath, or acupuncturist suggests you stop using scientifically proven
techniques, they are putting you in serious danger.

### page 209

Rule #2: Don’t go broke. It’s true that more expensive placebos work better than
cheaper ones, but there is a limit. Ranjana Srivastava, an author and oncologist
in Melbourne, Australia, has written about the challenges of treating cancer and
the relationship between doctor and patient. Her patients have spent thousands
on vitamin infusions, smoke therapies, and lavender extracts. She says patients
regularly come to her broke and near death after chasing placebos that haven’t
worked out.

### page 210

Rule #3: Don’t send any creature to extinction.

### page 210

Rule #4: Know thyself. As we have seen, for many people the suspicion that a
treatment might be a placebo does not change its ability to heal. There’s
nothing wrong with wondering in the back of your mind whether the herbal
immune-boosting shake in front of you is nothing more than a placebo wrapped in
wheatgrass puree.

### page 210

First of all, know what kind of person you are. Are you someone who might be
suggestible to the power of a certain placebo? If so, what kind?

### page 211

Second, get to know your condition (or symptoms, if you prefer). Is this a
problem that taps into dopamine and expectation?

### page 211

While you are getting to know yourself, try to determine how suggestible you
are. If you are looking to cure a physical problem, quit smoking, or beat
depression, give hypnosis a try to see if you are hypnotically susceptible. If
you are, hold on to that information, like your blood type or your vaccination
records. It’s a tool that you can use to find relief and improve your life.

### page 212

But the minute someone, whether a licensed therapist or your next-door neighbor
who dabbles in hypnosis, suggests they can help you retrieve lost memories or
improve a memory you do have, walk away. Be careful with techniques like
past-life regression or regression to the womb—anything where you’d be
retrieving memories you did not have before.

### page 213

Over the course of writing this book, a part of me genuinely hoped I would find
something so odd, so impressive as to be truly unexplainable. An honest-to-God
miracle cure. I never found it. Most recoveries I came across were, in the end,
either completely explainable through science or impossible to verify. Are you
disappointed? Don’t be. After all, what is a miracle but an event that’s
completely unexplainable?

### page 214

[Y]et the most successful healings I investigated took the view that the healing
had already happened. Mike Pauletich said this when he thought back on his
recovery from Parkinson’s, and so do many Christian healing ministries and even
Christian Science. It’s one thing to expect that healing will happen, but it
seems far more effective to expect that it already has. Placebos might be a
promise for the future, but they work only once you’ve ingested them, convinced
that they have done their job.

### page 216

“Hey, aren’t you one of those kids who doesn’t go to doctors? What happens if
you break your arm?” (Even the most devout Christian Scientist would go to a
doctor in a case like that. There are exceptions, it turns out, to every rule.)

### page 216

Christian Science doesn’t work if it’s mixed with other treatments. It requires
100 percent faith and 100 percent dedication. So I ask her the question I have
asked traditional Chinese doctors and witch doctors and New Age healers across
the world: Since suggestibility and placebos are part of every treatment, what
percentage of Christian Science healing is simply the body’s response to
expectation?

### page 217

“You say that the test of science is that you have a hypothesis you put to the
test, and then you draw conclusions for whether or not your hypothesis is
correct. My sense is that God’s law isn’t a hypothesis; it’s a rule. I am not
applying this science to test whether it’s true. I am applying this science to
prove that it is true.”

### page 218

"I want to love God with all my heart—and part of that is not to have any other
gods. And I think medicine is a god. I think matter is a god. And I realize
that’s radical and that you might really be offended by that.” She says this so
warmly and gently that I don’t even realize she’s just called everything I
believe in a false idol.

### page 219

Already, studies are starting to suggest that many common forms of arthroscopic
joint surgery may be no more successful than a sham surgery. Though if that knee
operation made it possible to ski again, who are you to question it?


