# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-25) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 231-232 | Added on Monday, March 2, 2020 12:36:55 PM

It is specifically knowledge I’m against, not true belief. Knowledge asks more of us than true belief, and it isn’t worth it. In reality, the concept of knowledge is a hangover from a stone-age way of thinking that has long outlived its usefulness.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-25) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 241-243 | Added on Monday, March 2, 2020 10:36:45 PM

For those philosophers who work in epistemology (the ‘theory of knowledge’), the holy grail is to pin down the nature of knowledge and explain why it matters. But despite thousands upon thousands of articles devoted to the topic, the philosophers haven’t been able to come up with a good story. I say that’s because they’re barking up the wrong tree. The notion of knowledge doesn’t in fact pick out anything important.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-25) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 268-271 | Added on Monday, March 2, 2020 10:39:33 PM

So why do we shun statistical evidence, given that we’re ready to tolerate a reasonable margin of false convictions with other kinds of evidence? This is currently a hot topic among legal theorists, but so far nobody has made much progress.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-03-04) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 18-19 | Added on Friday, March 6, 2020 11:27:03 PM

the job of an executive is: to define and enforce culture and values for their whole organization, and to ratify good decisions.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-03-04) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 18-22 | Added on Friday, March 6, 2020 11:27:29 PM

the job of an executive is: to define and enforce culture and values for their whole organization, and to ratify good decisions. That's all. Not to decide. Not to break ties. Not to set strategy. Not to be the expert on every, or any topic. Just to sit in the room while the right people make good decisions in alignment with their values. And if they do, to endorse it. And if they don't, to send them back to try again.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-03-04) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 65-67 | Added on Friday, March 6, 2020 11:32:37 PM

But command-and-control is not very efficient for knowledge workers, because of the fundamental problem that for any given situation, the people who know the most about it are the people at the bottom, not the people at

# Your P2K Articles (2020-03-04) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 65-67 | Added on Friday, March 6, 2020 11:32:41 PM

But command-and-control is not very efficient for knowledge workers, because of the fundamental problem that for any given situation, the people who know the most about it are the people at the bottom, not the people at the top.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-25) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 285-287 | Added on Sunday, March 8, 2020 4:45:14 PM

But despite huge amounts of effort, none of them has managed to find any. I say that’s because there isn’t any logic to be found. In truth, our preference for eyewitnesses over statistical evidence is nothing but a reflection of our crude prehistoric concern with knowledge.

