# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-16) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 2864-2867 | Added on Monday, February 17, 2020 10:22:53 AM

Can you think of a TV channel with a 93% audience? Would you find it acceptable if there were only one TV channel? Sounds preposterous, right? Not even Pravda had such a captive audience. That’s what Google really is. Of course, they will claim that they are only a platform. They will defend themselves, that they do not produce the news, that they don’t create or edit the content.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-13) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 25-26 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 1:27:43 AM

Şımarık olmak bir varoluş, bir yapışkanlık, hiç tasvip edemeyeceğim bir karakter biçimi. Ama şımartılmak, işte o harika bir şey.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-13) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 29-30 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 1:28:50 AM

Sabahları mekanik sesiyle sorduğu “bu gün doktora tezin için ne yaptın?” soruları; uyduruyor mu gerçek mi ayırt edemediğim hikâyeleri ve beni sürekli güldürerek “güzel güldüğüme inandırması” gibi güzellikler için girdi belki de.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-13) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 38-39 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 1:29:38 AM

İyi ki gitmişiz. Şimdi olsa gidebilir miyiz? Zor. İyi ki “boş ver Fransızca kursunu as” demiş Mart ayında beni güzel güldüğüme ikna etmek için hayatıma giren kişi.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-13) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 41-42 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 1:30:01 AM

Haziran: Annemler umreye gitti. Beni güzel güldüğüme ikna etmek için hayatıma giren kişi haziran ayında hayatımdan çıktı.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-13) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 60-61 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 1:31:27 AM

Tozpembe değil hiçbir şey. Belki bir gün, birdenbire girdiği gibi hayatımdan gidecek de. Ama ben, olduğu tüm dönemler için, iyi ki var diyeceğim, böyle hissediyorum. Böyle hissedebildiğim için, mutluyum.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-17) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 41-47 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 8:13:26 AM

Common to many different religions is an emphasis on contemplative practices — turning one’s focus inward in search of transcendent insight (what Karen Armstrong calls “intimations of the divine.”) Sometimes these practices are structured, as in the Islamic Salat, Buddhist mindfulness meditation, or, as is familiar around my academic home, Jesuit imaginative prayer. And sometimes they’re unstructured, like King’s experience at the kitchen table. Regardless of form, contemplative reflection is often intertwined with spiritual life.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-17) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 334-337 | Added on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 8:18:00 AM

Instead, the scientific research suggests that you should adopt an ancient rhetorical method favoured by the likes of Julius Caesar and known as ‘illeism’ – or speaking about yourself in the third person (the term was coined in 1809 by the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge from the Latin ille meaning ‘he, that’). If I was considering an argument that I’d had with a friend, for instance, I might start by silently thinking to myself: ‘David felt frustrated that…’

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-17) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 353-355 | Added on Wednesday, February 19, 2020 1:13:16 AM

In a series of laboratory experiments, they found that people tend to be humbler, and readier to consider other perspectives, when they are asked to describe problems in the third person.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-17) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 355-357 | Added on Wednesday, February 19, 2020 1:13:45 AM

Adopting a third-person perspective might help you to recognise their point of view or to accept the limits of your understanding of the problem at hand. Or imagine you are considering moving jobs. Taking the distanced perspective could help you to weigh up the benefits and the risks of the move more dispassionately.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-17) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 376-378 | Added on Wednesday, February 19, 2020 1:15:31 AM

Clearly, politicians might use illeism for purely rhetorical purposes but, when applied to genuine reflection, it appears to be a powerful tool for wiser reasoning.

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-15) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 31-32 | Added on Wednesday, February 19, 2020 10:08:24 AM

Man should be required to confront his stupidity, not hide behind it moaning about useless nonsense. In my last book I didn’t waste time trying to

# Your P2K Articles (2020-02-15) (P2K) - Your Highlight on Location 31-32 | Added on Wednesday, February 19, 2020 10:08:29 AM

Man should be required to confront his stupidity, not hide behind it moaning about useless nonsense.

