=============================
The Now Habit (Neil A. Fiore)
=============================

:date: 2014-11-23 02:18:14 +0200

.. :Author: Emin Reşah
.. :Date:   12834

/Ertelemecilik bir işe başlamak ve bitirmekten kaynaklanan kaygıyla başa
çıkma yollarından biridir/ diye başlamış kitap. En önemli
hastalıklarımdan biri olduğu için okudum ama içinde bendenizi tedavi
edecek pek bir şey yoktu.

\*Tembelim ama deva arıyorum.\*

Woody Allen'ın *Hayat zordur, sonra ölürsün* diye bir lafı varmış.
Tembellerin böyle hissettiğini söylüyor. Doğru bence. Hayat zor ve
*rahat* diye bir şey yok. Bu kitap bizi *stresten uzak oyuna*
sevkedeceğini söylüyor ama dediğim gibi, bu çok zor.

Hem stresi ben yaratmıyorum ki.

Nasıl bir çaresi varmış? Evvela kendimizi psikolojik bir *güvenlik
filesine* bağlı hissetmeliymişiz. Düşme tehlikemizin olmadığı, yapmamız
gereken işi yapmazsak *hayatımızın kararacağı* gibi düşünceler bizi felç
ediyormuş. Bunun yerine *en kötü ne olabilir ki?* veya *işe ne zaman
başlayabilirim?* diye düşünmeliymişiz.

Kendimizle pozitif konuşunca daha rahat hissedecekmişiz ve böylece
tembellik etmeyip, işimizi yapabilecekmişiz.

İşin içinde (tabii ki) *3-boyutlu düşünce*, *ters takvim* ve *narandevu*
diye laflar da var. 3 boyutlu düşünce sanırım hem işi, hem oyunu hem
başka bir şeyi daha düşünmek. *Ters takvim* işin biteceği tarihten geri
doğru gereken adımların yapılması gereken tarihleri bulmak. *Narandevu*
nedir, henüz okumadım veya aklımda kalmadı.

Arkadaşım, proje adımlarının ne zaman biteceğini bilsem, zaten yaparım.
Mesele o adımların ne olduğunu, kimin yapacağını ve ne zaman biteceğini
bilememek. Yaptığımız işlerin çoğunda bu bilgilere sahip değiliz, buna
rağmen harekete geçirebiliyor musun, ben ona bakıyorum.

/Gerçekçi hedefler koymak/ diyor bir bölüm. *Çok işe üşeniyorsan, az iş
yap* de de, bütün bu lafazanlığın gerçek anlamını bilelim. Kitabın ilk
basımı 89'daymış. (Geçen yüzyıl!) O zaman için *büyük yenilik*
sayılabilir bunlar ama şimdilerde (en azından benim için) işe yaramayan
fikirler. Kitabın başında *tembellik zaman yönetimiyle ilgili değildir*
diyor ama anlattığı *çözümler* de hep zaman yönetimiyle alakalı.

Tembellik kalbini bürüdüğünde insanın kendini mefluç etmemesi gerek,
bunun için de çalışmaya başlaması ve azıcık iş yapması dışında bir çare
yok. O ilk adımı kolay attırabilirsen, devamı da geliyor.

Söylediği doğrular da çok. *Başarı korkusundan* veya *bu iş biterse
sorumluluklarım artacak* korkusundan herkes bahsetmez. İnsanların
başarısız olmalarının sebepleri arasında yalnız kalmaktan korkmaları
bile vardır, bunu da anlatıyor, doğru. Arızanın nerelerde çıktığı
konusunda haklı, ancak sunduğu çözümlerin bunlara bir faydası yok.

Alıntılar
=========

The Now Habit exercises help you break the cycle of procrastination by
removing the stigma of calling yourself “a procrastinator” who’s
burdened by having to get so many things done. (p. 6)

--------------

Advances in research conducted by NIH (the National Institutes of
Health) and in the fields of neuropsychology and behavioral medicine
over the last twenty years have proven that we can take control over our
negative habits if we follow a series of steps. (p. 7)

--------------

The cycle starts with the pressure of being overwhelmed and ends with an
attempt to escape through procrastination. (p. 9)

--------------

People who have been procrastinating for years on major life goals are
already pretty good at self-criticism. (p. 9)

--------------

Procrastination is a mechanism for coping with the anxiety associated
with starting or completing any task or decision. (p. 11)

--------------

those most vulnerable to procrastination are those who feel the most
threatened by difficulty in starting a project, criticism, failure, and
the loss of other opportunities (p. 11)

--------------

“Life is hard, and then you die,” (p. 11)

--------------

Creating safety will show you how to put a psychological safety net (p.
13)

--------------

Reprogramming negative attitudes through positive self-talk (p. 13)

--------------

Using the symptom to trigger the cure will (p. 13)

--------------

Guilt-free play will teach you how to strategically schedule your
leisure time in order to shift your focus from work (p. 13)

--------------

Three-dimensional thinking and the reverse calendar (p. 13)

--------------

Making worry work for you will show you how developing plans for coping
with distractions (p. 13)

--------------

Unschedule will let you see the freedom awaiting you through
prescheduled guilt-free play (p. 13)

--------------

Controlled setbacks will prepare you for setbacks so that you quickly
turn them into opportunities (p. 14)

--------------

Do you believe “I am what I do” or “I am my net worth”? (p. 17)

--------------

So-called procrastinators can be found in every walk of life,
accomplishing much in those arenas where they have chosen to devote
themselves, but totally unable to get started in others. (p. 18)

--------------

“a neurotic form of self-defensive behavior” aimed at protecting one’s
self-worth. (p. 19)

--------------

Early in life they learn that all they can expect from finishing a
project is criticism or so-called constructive feedback on how it might
be improved. (p. 23)

--------------

I have discovered that there is one main reason why we procrastinate: it
rewards us with temporary relief from stress. (p. 26)

--------------

even a seemingly counterproductive habit like procrastination is
immediately followed by some reward. (p. 26)

--------------

You can use procrastination to get even with powerful authorities who
place you in situations where your alternatives all seem negative. (p.
29)

--------------

they were only surface attempts at coping with deep resentment and hurt.
(p. 30)

--------------

stuck—too old to look for another job, he had to stick it out without
ever saying anything (p. 30)

--------------

Certainly others are frequently in positions of power to affect you and
your job, and they might even try to judge your work or your skills. But
they can never make you into a victim or a procrastinator. Only you can
do that. (p. 31)

--------------

Perfectionism and self-criticism are, in fact, the chief causes of fear
of failure. (p. 31)

--------------

a perfectionist is even more sensitive to failure because having his or
her work judged “average” is tantamount to being considered “a failure
as a person.” (p. 31)

--------------

Those who gain their sense of identity from many areas are more
resilient when failing in any one area. (p. 32)

--------------

success in completing a project means facing some painful disincentives
to success, such as moving, looking for a new job, or paying back
student loans; (p. 33)

--------------

success means advancement to increasing demands (p. 33)

--------------

As the demands on your time and attention become greater, friends and
family may come to resent your ambitions and your success. (p. 34)

--------------

“I learned that you’ll have more friends if you don’t give them a reason
to be jealous.” (p. 34)

--------------

While Dorothy could never openly sabotage her performance, she did
procrastinate in an attempt to avoid the hurt of being ostracized for
her success. (p. 34)

--------------

If you haven’t had time for guilt-free play you may feel, “I really
can’t enjoy my success because still more is required of me. It takes
the fun out of winning.” (p. 36)

--------------

With procrastination, though, you’ve covered yourself both ways: there’s
always an excuse, in case you don’t perform as well as you’d hoped; and
there’s also some reserve left, if you still do succeed. (p. 37)

--------------

Procrastination has been learned, and it can be unlearned. Until now
it’s been a rewarding and necessary tool for escaping tasks that seem
painful and depriving. (p. 38)

--------------

Knowing how you procrastinate is even more important than knowing why.
(p. 39)

----

Ironically, on a psychological level you are often the one who raises
the board off the ground by changing a straightforward task into a test
of your worth, proof that you are acceptable, or a test of whether you
will be successful and happy or a failure and miserable. (p. 48)

--------------

First, you give a task or a goal the power to determine your worth and
happiness. (p. 50)

--------------

Second, you use perfectionism to raise the task 100 feet above the
ground, so (p. 50)

--------------

Third, you find yourself frozen with anxiety (p. 51)

--------------

Fourth, you then use procrastination to escape your dilemma, which
brings the deadline closer, creating time pressure, a higher level of
anxiety, and a more immediate and frightening threat than even your fear
of failure or of criticism for (p. 51)

--------------

Fifth and last stage, you then use a real threat, such as a fire or a
deadline, to release yourself from perfectionism and to act as a
motivator . (p. 51)

--------------

Changing how you talk to yourself is a powerful tool for disengaging
from procrastination patterns of hesitation and indecision. Through (p.
56)

--------------

what has become more important to me over the years is the lesson of
empowerment that comes from changing a “have to” into a choice. From
Resistance to Commitment Limited options and unpleasant choices abound
in life. (p. 63)

--------------

For procrastinators blocked by an addiction to perfectionism, I often
recommend a direct attack to unlearn this insidious pattern. (p. 70)

--------------

On the other hand, those who were making good progress toward finishing
in a year were dedicated and committed to their leisure time. (p. 76)

--------------

“Personally I’m always ready to learn, although I do not always like
being taught.” (p. 78)

--------------

This model of motivation indicates that there’s a low chance that you’ll
start to work on a task whose immediate results are isolation and pain,
and whose rewards are uncertain and in the distant future. (p. 80)

--------------

Regularly scheduled periods of guilt-free play will give you a fresh
outlook on work. Your play time will let you experience your own native
curiosity and willingness to do good, quality work. (p. 87)

--------------

Stress Prayer: Grant me the stubbornness to struggle against things I
cannot change; the inertia to avoid work on my own behaviors and
attitudes which I can change; and the foolishness to ignore the
differences between external events beyond my control and my own
controllable reactions. But most of all, grant me a contempt for my own
human imperfection and the limits of human control. (p. 87)

--------------

The three major fears that block action and create procrastination are
the terror of being overwhelmed, the fear of failure, and the fear of
not finishing. (p. 88)

--------------

Insist on knowing the one right place to start. The indecision and delay
in looking for the one right place keeps you from getting on to the rest
of the project. (p. 91)

--------------

As you picture several smaller deadlines—all within your control—the
paralysis caused by trying to complete a large project (with dire
consequences if you fail) disappears. (p. 92)

--------------

Who of you can add one moment to his life’s course by worrying? So, if
you cannot bring about that little, why be anxious about the rest?” (p.
94)

--------------

Parents, bosses, and teachers often use threats and images of disaster
to motivate us to achieve goals they have chosen. (p. 95)

--------------

Most people wish for an illusory confidence that says, “I must know that
I will win; I should have a guarantee that nothing will go wrong.” This
(p. 100)

--------------

Difficulties with finishing, like fear of success, can involve certain
disincentives for completing a project. (p. 100)

--------------

You’re probably seeing the work of remembering as drudgery; something to
keep you from having fun. (p. 101)

--------------

She was so good at getting things started that Laura wasn’t sure if she
was a real procrastinator. In (p. 101)

--------------

By literally counting her steps, Laura learned to avoid being
overwhelmed by more work and to focus on what she could do, repeating,
“I can take one more step.” (p. 103)

--------------

“I need to do more preparation before I can start.” Be alert to when
preparation becomes procrastination. (p. 103)

--------------

To overcome this tendency, label as procrastination any tendency to run
to the boss for advice or run to the library for outside solutions or
further preparation. (p. 103)

--------------

“At this rate I’ll never finish.” The rate of learning and
accomplishment in the beginning of a project is often slower than you’re
accustomed to. (p. 104)

--------------

should have started earlier.” You got started and you need to appreciate
that. (p. 104)

--------------

“There’s only more work after this.” One of the fears of success is that
more will be demanded of you. (p. 104)

--------------

“It’s not working.” Self-talk such as “I’m trying, but it’s not working.
What’s wrong?” can indicate perfectionism and a failure to do the work
of worrying to develop alternative plans to make this (p. 105)

--------------

only need a little more time.” The engineering, sales, or production
department is ready to put your work to use but you’re begging for more
time to polish it and to look for glitches. (p. 105)

--------------

You may find it difficult to accept that others do not hold your high
standards of quality. In fact, you may feel a little superior about
that. (p. 106)

--------------

All the greatest and most important problems of life are fundamentally
unsolvable. . . . [they were] not solved logically in [their] own terms
but fade when confronted with a new and stronger life urge. —CARL JUNG
(p. 107)

--------------

only work will diminish your anxiety. (p. 107)

--------------

The only thing that really helps is to start working. (p. 107)

--------------

The Unschedule is a weekly calender of committed recreational activities
that divides the week into manageable pieces with breaks, meals,
scheduled socializing, and play. In addition, it’s a record of your
productive, uninterrupted work. (p. 110)

--------------

By starting with the scheduling of recreation, leisure, and quality time
with friends, the Unschedule avoids one of the traps of typical programs
for overcoming procrastination that begin with the scheduling of
work—thereby generating an immediate image of a life devoid of fun and
freedom. (p. 111)

--------------

Thirty minutes of steady work is enough to give you a sense of
accomplishment without creating the fear of failure that often
accompanies the scheduling of longer, less realistic periods of work
that are seldom achieved or even started because they’re so
overwhelming. (p. 111)

--------------

the Unschedule builds up a subconscious desire to work more and play
less. (p. 112)

--------------

“Do not work more than twenty hours a week,” I insisted. “And never work
more than five hours in any day on your project. Promise me that you
will resist the urge to work more than twenty hours a week.” (p. 113)

--------------

Schedule only: • previously committed time such as meals, sleep,
meetings • free time, recreation, leisure reading • socializing, lunches
and dinners with friends • health activities such as swimming, running,
tennis, working out at the gym • routine structured events such as
commuting time, classes, medical appointments (p. 115)

--------------

Fill in your Unschedule with work on projects only after you have
completed at least one-half hour. (p. 115)

--------------

Unschedule represents quality work, not trips to get potato chips or to
make calls. (p. 116)

--------------

Reward yourself with a break or a change to a more enjoyable task after
each period worked. (p. 116)

--------------

Keep track of the number of quality hours worked each day and each week.
(p. 116)

--------------

Always leave at least one full day a week for recreation and any small
chores you wish to take care of. (p. 116)

--------------

Before deciding to go to a recreational activity or social commitment,
take time out for just thirty minutes of work on your project. (p. 117)

--------------

Aim for thirty minutes of quality, focused work. (p. 118)

--------------

Keep starting. Finishing will take care of itself. When it is time to
start the last thirty minutes that will finish the project, that too
will be an act of starting—the start of the conclusion of your current
project, as well as the beginning of your next. (p. 118)

--------------

Never end “down.” That is, never stop work when you’re blocked or at the
end of a section. Remember “Grandma’s Principle”: to create good habits
your breaks and treats must follow some work. (p. 118)

--------------

Without a record of your legitimate commitments to leisure, you’re more
apt to feel guilty about lost time or to feel depressed when you see
blank spaces on your schedule and can’t remember how you spent the time.
(p. 122)

--------------

One of the many fringe benefits of pre-scheduling your leisure
activities is that, when one of them is canceled, you can suddenly find
yourself thinking with relief, “I have free time; I can work.” (p. 125)

--------------

Characteristics of the flow state include calm, focused energy; time
expansion; delight at new ideas; ease at avoiding or solving problems;
and enhanced concentration. (p. 126)

--------------

Trying to be creative (or to relax and concentrate) can become almost
impossible if the so-called practical part of your brain is attempting
to supervise, criticize, and fix every possible error before your
intuitive side has had a chance to gain confidence at an awkward or
unpleasant task. (p. 128)

--------------

The pleasure of creativity is the greatest pleasure in the world. —SAMMY
KAHN ACADEMY AWARD-WINNING SONGWRITER (p. 129)

--------------

Focusing is a two-minute procedure for shifting rapidly to the flow
state by replacing guilt and stress with a stress-free focus on the
present. (p. 130)

--------------

Successful people fail many times and bounce back, refusing to let any
one failure define their worth. In spite of the difficulties and
failures they face in life, successful people learn to be resilient and
carry on. (p. 144)

--------------

Charles Garfield tells us that the trajectory of the Apollo moon rocket
was off course 90 percent of the time. By acknowledging the deviations
from the expected path, the scientists were able to repeatedly make the
necessary corrections and achieve an imperfect, but adequate, trajectory
to the moon. (p. 145)

--------------

Being a champion—a consistent producer—requires that you forgive
yourself for errors and losing streaks (p. 146)

--------------

I discovered that an essential part of their training as long-distance
runners involves letting go of the goal and staying in the process—for
over two hours. (p. 149)

--------------

the problem is not that you can’t concentrate, but that your attention
is drawn to something you’d rather not be concentrating on or worrying
about, such as your boss’s potential criticism or how badly you’d like
to be finished. (p. 150)

--------------

Strong Emotions. This is the one type of distraction that deserves your
immediate attention. You may be using work as an attempt to distract
yourself from facing strong emotions regarding a loved one,
confrontations with difficult people, or medical or financial concerns.
(p. 151)

--------------

Warnings of Danger. Real or imagined threats will interrupt your ability
to concentrate by stimulating an adrenaline reaction. (p. 152)

--------------

“To-Do” Reminders. While you’re immersed in a difficult project, that
quart of milk you have to buy or some other “to-do list” item will
suddenly haunt you for no apparent reason. (p. 152)

--------------

Escape Fantasies. If you anticipate long periods of deprivation, you can
expect an increase in fantasies about food, sex, and vacations. Record
your escape fantasies to plan your future guilt-free play. Deciding (p.
152)

--------------

UFOs—Unidentified Flights of Originality. Creative and often seductive
thoughts that cannot be fathomed at this time may fly through your mind
while you are working on a project. These may be very creative
associations but they are probably not useful to you at this time. (p.
152)

--------------

By using mental rehearsal you can find yourself remembering to start on
your project at the preprogrammed time. You will have given your mind a
picture it can grasp and a message it can cooperate (p. 155)

--------------

One of the best-kept secrets of successful producers is their ability to
let go of goals that cannot be achieved or started in the near future.
(p. 156)

--------------

Recognize the work of procrastinating. Let go of the fantasy that you
can escape work by procrastinating. There is no path in life that
requires no effort. (p. 157)

--------------

even feeling guilty because of procrastinating takes some effort. (p.
158)

--------------

player, said about his daily exercise routine, “I hate sit-ups. If I
leave them for last I dread my entire workout. It ruins my attitude
about the whole workout. (p. 159)

--------------

Create functional, observable goals. Vague goals must be translated into
something tangible you can do. (p. 159)

--------------

When employees can be more than victims, passively complying with
demands and threats, they can drop resistance to authority and commit
their motivation and creativity to getting the job done rather than
avoiding punishment. (p. 163)

--------------

No matter how carefully phrased, many important orders require complex
implementations. (p. 167)

--------------

praise should precede even the mildest form of recommendation for
improvement. (p. 169)

--------------

Asking your workers to repeat difficult and complex tasks wastes their
efforts and reinforces procrastination. (p. 171)

--------------

success. I wanted David and Karen to grasp the fact that if these
underlying fears could be allayed, the learned tactic of procrastination
could rapidly be unlearned. (p. 175)
