First Muslim: The Story of Muhammad -- Lesley Hazleton (Quotations)
===================================================================

:date: 2015-07-08 04:34:03 +0300

.. :author: Emin Reşah
.. :date: Sat May 16 14:39:35 EEST 2015 
.. :dp: 13088 


[H]e must have had a stiff neck, because people would remember that
when he turned to look at you, he turned his whole body instead of
just his head. (p. 5)

------

One thing is certain: by Muhammad’s own account, he was completely
unprepared for the enormity of what he would experience on this
particular night in the year 610. (p. 6)

------

So the man who fled down Mount Hira trembled not with joy but with a
stark, primordial fear. (p. 7)

------

It sounds fallibly human—too human for some, like conservative Muslim
theologians who argue that the account of his trying to kill himself
should not even be mentioned despite the fact that it’s in the
earliest Islamic biographies. (p. 8)

------

The more you read, the more liable you are to come away with the
feeling that while you may know a lot about Muhammad, you still don’t
know who he was. (p. 8)

------

[S]tory is an extraordinary confluence of man, time, and culture, and
it begs a deceptively simple question: Why him? Why Muhammad, in the
seventh century, in Arabia? (p. 9)

------

[T]he lengthy biography of him written in eighth-century Damascus by
ibn-Ishaq, on which every subsequent biography at least claims to be
based, (p. 10)

------

Throughout ibn-Ishaq’s work, for instance, there are phrases such as
“it is alleged that” and “so I have been told.” In fact when several
eyewitness accounts seem to contradict one another, he often sums up
with “As to which of these is correct, only God knows for sure”—a
statement that verges on a helpless “God knows!” (p. 10)

------

Muhammad’s is one of those rare lives that is more dramatic in reality
than in legend. In fact the less one invokes the miraculous, the more
extraordinary his life becomes. (p. 11)

------

Indeed, any objective observer might have concluded that Muhammad was
a most unlikely candidate for prophethood, since whatever stars he was
born under, they seemed anything but auspicious. (p. 12)

------

Just hours before he was conceived, his grandfather nearly killed his
father. And as though the father had been spared only long enough to
fulfill his singular role, he would then die far from home, unaware
that he even had a son. (p. 13)

------

Wasn’t that why the sole thing in the forbidden interior of the Kaaba
was rumored to be the horns of the ram that had taken Ishmael’s place
in that foundational act of sacrifice? (p. 14)

------

“There were none more prominent and stately than they, nor of more
noble profile, with noses so long that the nose drank before the
lips,” he would write, celebrating the feature so admired in a society
that scorned snub noses, considering them as effeminate as the pale
skin of Byzantine Greeks, referred to derisively as “yellow men.”
(p. 14)

------

Surely there could be nothing lost by consulting a kahin, one of the
handful of priest-like seers—their title the Arabic equivalent of the
Hebrew cohen—who could enter spirit trances and understand the mystery
of their signs. (p. 16)

------

[T]he focus on male heirs meant that female infanticide was as high in
Mecca as in Constantinople, Athens, and Rome—a practice the Quran was
to address directly and condemn repeatedly. As it was, Muhammad seemed
destined to be what his Meccan opponents would later call him: “a
nobody.” (p. 18)

------

If the specific reasons weren’t understood, the concept of fresh air
was. (p. 22)

------

The story reverberates with echoes of the Christian nativity
story. Halima and her husband are the humble shepherds, and if there
are no tales of wise men bringing gifts or of comets streaking across
the night sky or of paranoid retaliation by a vicious king, popular
belief demands its share of omens nonetheless. (p. 22)

------

(the sakina being the Arabic counterpart of the Kabbalistic shekhina);
 (p. 31)

------

[O]n Buddhist tradition (the mysterious seal of prophecy between the
shoulder blades). (p. 31)

------

If he were in fact subject to epileptic fits, his many opponents in
Mecca would certainly have made much of his condition, yet even though
they would use every argument they could muster against his
preaching—he was a fabulist, they’d say, a dreamer, a liar, a
sorcerer—they would never use this one. (p. 32)

------

Psychologists have pointed to the remarkably long list of
“high-achievement” figures orphaned young. They include Confucius,
Marcus Aurelius, William the Conqueror, Cardinal Richelieu, the
metaphysical poet John Donne, Lord Byron, Isaac Newton, and Friedrich
Nietzsche, to name just a few, and possibly also Jesus, since Joseph
disappears from the Gospel narratives almost the moment he is
born. (p. 33)

------

As one researcher puts it, the awareness of vulnerability can have a
paradoxical strengthening effect: “The question of morality and
conscience, a hallmark of creativity, enters with the sense of
injustice that the orphaned child feels and continues to feel into
adulthood,” and eventually develops into “a thirst for identity, a
need to imprint oneself on the world.” (p. 34)

------

If Abd al-Muttalib even registered the boy’s existence, it was
doubtless as just another child scurrying around. (p. 36)

------

Mecca was not the backward, isolated enclave most modern Westerners
seem to imagine. It was a thriving capitalist hub, a central point on
the north–south trade route that ran the length of western Arabia from
the ports of Yemen up to the Mediterranean, and to Damascus and
beyond. The (p. 37)

------

A northward exodus began, including several clans led by the legendary
Qusayy, Abd al-Muttalib’s great-grandfather. (p. 37)

------

When Muhammad first laid eyes on it, it was a relatively modest
affair, at least by modern standards. Its stone and clay walls were
still only the height of a man, and its roof was merely palm fronds
draped with cloth. (p. 38)

------

And La sharika laka illa sharikun huaw laka, “Thou hast no partner
except such partner as thou hast”—a mysteriously ambiguous formulation
that seemed to include and acknowledge all the other tribal divinities
while still keeping them, as it were, in their place. (p. 39)

------

In reality there can have been no more than a dozen such idols, and
they acted not as gods per se but as tribal totems. The fact that they
were arrayed around the Kaaba, not inside it, made it clear that they
were subordinate to the one god whose shrine this was. (p. 39)

------

The whole point was that they were not statues. The Hebrew bible had
been insistent that the twelve stones for the altar were to be
“unhewn,” not shaped in any way by human hand. (p. 40)

------

Some other, greater force had shaped them: the power of wind and time
on sandstone, or the volcanic power behind quartz and feldspar and
mica, or the other-worldly power of meteorites falling in fire from
the heavens. (p. 40)

------

But the most haunting possibility, as well as the most likely, is that
as in the holy of holies of the Jewish temple that had once stood far
to the north in Jerusalem, the Kaaba was empty. No physical object
could possibly contain the essence of the one god, so that the
emptiness constituted a much greater mystery than any number of idols
or piles of treasure. (p. 41)

------

The last way any of the great Greek philosophers would have described
themselves was pagan. Then as now, the word was used derogatively. It
came from the same root as the English word “peasant” (pagus in Latin,
meaning a rural district); to the Roman aristocrat, a peasant was by
definition a pagan, and vice versa. (p. 41)

------

The irony is that the early Islamic historians, like the Hebrew
prophets before them, thus proved themselves as Orientalist as any of
the nineteenth-century scholars and writers so effectively dissected
by Edward Said in his classic critique Orientalism. (p. 42)

------

Fees for the right to set up a tent, for entry to the Kaaba precinct,
for the officials who cast arrows in front of Hubal or cut the throats
of sacrificial animals and divided up the meat—all these and more were
predetermined, and to the sole profit of the Quraysh. Their business
was faith, and their faith was in business. (p. 43)

------

[W]hile wishful accounts would have it that the uncle took special
care of his nephew from the beginning, the record is clear that
Muhammad was put to work as a lowly camel boy, and that within two
years he was working in that capacity on the Meccan trade
caravans. (p. 46)

------

The conflict between the Byzantine and the Persian empires was in
effect an eight-hundred-year war that had gone on since the time of
Alexander the Great, and by now it had thoroughly depleted the
resources of both sides. (p. 48)

------

Bahira insisted that the boy be brought in, then had him stand still
while he examined his torso, searching for the “seal of prophethood”
foretold in that mysterious tome of his—in varying accounts either a
third nipple, as some say is found in each reincarnation of the Dalai
Lama, or a birthmark between the shoulder blades “like the imprint of
a cupping glass.” (p. 50)

------

But another, still current in today’s Middle East, had him physically
protecting the woman by shielding her with his body and adding two
crucial words: “Let he who is without sin cast the first stone at me.”
(p. 55)

------

[T]hose wishing to visit the cave of the seven sleepers still have a
choice: near Ephesus in Turkey, a few miles north of Damascus in
Syria, or just outside Amman in Jordan. (p. 55)

------

He saw how his uncle was always the first to reach out and clasp the
other’s hands in his own: a politician’s handshake, making the other
feel honored, drawn in, special. (p. 57)

------

If Bahira had indeed foreseen a great future for Muhammad, abu-Talib
had clearly not taken him seriously. And if Muhammad had imagined that
he had overcome the limitations of his childhood, he was now harshly
reminded that they still applied. Abu-Talib’s denial of his request
carried a clear message. “This far and no further,” he was saying in
effect. “Good but not good enough.” In his uncle’s mind, Muhammad was
still “one of us, yet not one of us.” (p. 59)

------

The most cogent explanation for their long, monogamous marriage is
also the simplest: they had a real bond of deep love and affection,
one that lasted twenty-four years. (p. 60)

------

How could he when he was already the leader of a burgeoning new
faith—the revered prophet, the messenger of God, the one whom people
vied to be close to, to have his ear? (p. 60)

------

Instead of haggling endlessly, offering lower prices and demanding
higher ones than he knew he would get, he offered fair prices from the
start—and because he was known to be fair, was given better-quality
merchandise in return. (p. 62)

------

What commissions he earned, he gave away in alms to the poor. Other
merchants undoubtedly thought him foolish for this. How did such a man
expect to marry at all, let alone marry well? (p. 62)

------

The whole point, after all, was that the hanifs resisted
categorization. Their search was for a purer form of monotheism,
untainted by the sectarian divisiveness rife in the Middle East of the
time. (p. 65)

------

[I]n Mecca as in any modern society, the fact that something needed to
be tolerated implied that it was still somehow distasteful. (p. 66)

------

Known as “the monk,” he found solitary refuge in a stone hut at the
foot of Mount Hira before leaving to pursue the life of a wandering
dervish, seeking out the great spiritual masters of the day throughout
the Middle East. (p. 66)

------

Did he practice breathing exercises on these night vigils, the kind of
exercises only now being rediscovered in the West but widely used by
mystics throughout history? (p. 67)

------

Did Muhammad stand in simple gratitude for the ordinary human
happiness that had been granted him against all expectation, or was
there a certain watchfulness about him, as though he were waiting for
something about to happen? (p. 73)

------

“I recited it, and the angel desisted and departed. I woke up, and it
was as though these words had been engraved on my heart. There was
none of God’s creation more hateful to me than a poet or a madman; I
could not bear to look at either of them, yet I thought, ‘I must be
either a poet or a madman. But if so, Quraysh will never say this of
me. I shall take myself to a mountain cliff, hurl myself down from it,
and find respite in death.’ (p. 73)

------

There is nothing remotely blissful about such an experience, Otto
emphasized, throwing in a sly dig at those who cling to the idea of
revelation as ecstatic by concluding that “the singularly daunting and
awe-inspiring character of such a moment must be gravely disturbing to
those who will recognize nothing in the divine nature but goodness,
gentleness, love, and a sort of confidential intimacy.” (p. 75)

------

The fact that an altered state of consciousness has a physical
correlate should come as no surprise, since brain chemistry parallels
experiential input. But to then imagine that everything is explained
by chemistry is to fall into the reductive trap of what William James
called “medical materialism,” which dismisses experience in favor of
mechanics. (p. 76)

------

But while this may sound wonderful in principle, consider that a human
being is not water. Imagine being breathed into—inspired—with such
force that your body can hardly bear it. No gentle breath from heaven
here, but air being impelled into your lungs under immense pressure,
as though a giant were giving you mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation. (p. 77)

------

Because if she was right, and Waraqa too, then the respect that
Muhammad had worked so long and hard for was now in jeopardy. He would
be the outsider again, even the outcast. Not merely ignored but
actively despised and derided, his honor impugned, his dignity
transgressed. The small, modest peace he had achieved over the years
would be torn away from him, and there was no knowing if he would ever
find it again. (p. 80)

------

Especially the doubt, which is in many ways essential to real
faith. If this seems a startling idea at first blush, consider that
religion risks becoming fanatically inhuman without it. (p. 81)

------

To walk out on the limb of a tall tree believing that it won’t break
requires only a certain foolhardy credulity; to walk out on that same
limb fully aware that it might indeed break requires placing one’s
faith or one’s trust in God or fate or the law of averages. (p. 81)

------

Could he even endure such pain again? “Never once did I receive a
revelation without thinking that my soul had been torn away from me,”
he’d say toward the end of his life. (p. 83)

------

The verses laid out an almost environmentalist approach to the natural
world still unparalleled in any other holy book, (p. 85)

------

[T]he unpredictability of the timing was itself part of the
process. If revelation had come on a regular basis, the words piling
up like those of a writer determined to fulfill a daily quota, one
might suspect too much neatness for credibility, as though a direct
line had been established between human and divine, one that could be
dialed into on demand. (p. 86)

------

They had all eaten with appetite, and had leaned back satiated against
their pillows when their host calmly began to recite in the heightened
rhyming prose known as *saj,* which was the accepted form for poetry
and oracular utterance. The word literally means “cooing,” (p. 87)

------


[T]he new verses he’d recite there would go far beyond mystical
praise. They would constitute a stinging critique of the greed and
cynicism that had turned Mecca into a kind of seventh-century
equivalent of a Wall Street bull market, (p. 91)

------

“We desire to show favor to those oppressed on earth, to make them the
leaders and the inheritors.”15 (p. 92)

------

The call for justice was a protest as fierce as those of the biblical
prophets and of Jesus, and the similarity of the call was no
coincidence. As with early Judaism and early Christianity, early Islam
would be rooted in opposition to a corrupt status quo. (p. 93)

------

No matter how far they might have strayed from their origins as they
became institutionalized over time, the historical record clearly
indicates that what we now call the drive for social justice was the
idealistic underpinning of monotheistic faith. But (p. 94)

------

[S]ince there was no possibility of the dead accepting monotheism,
Muhammad’s opponents took this to mean that their fathers and
forefathers were condemned, ipso facto, to be companions of the
fire. They took it, that is, as the ultimate insult: literally, “Go to
hell.” (p. 98)

------

That “eye for an eye” is of course from the Hebrew bible, where it
appears first in the book of Exodus, and is then repeated for good
measure in Leviticus. But it was never uniquely biblical. It had been
the basis of law throughout the ancient world, and had been encoded
under the Latin name of lex talionis—a phrase that means “law of
retaliation” and is associated in English, however incorrectly, with
the sharp talon of a predatory bird: nature red in tooth and
claw. (p. 101)

------

Indeed if a man’s slaying went unavenged, it was believed that an owl
would emerge from his grave calling “Give me drink! Give me drink!”
in demand for blood to slake its thirst. (p. 101)

------

“Take Umara as your own, and you will have the benefit of his
intelligence and support. Adopt him as your own son and in return give
us this nephew of yours, the one who has opposed your tradition and
the tradition of your fathers, who has severed the unity of our people
and mocked our way of life, so that we may kill him.” (p. 105)

------

They intended to give Muhammad neither money nor power, hoping instead
to tempt him into agreeing so that they could then claim that he was
nothing but a hypocrite, a man who said one thing in public while
accepting quite another under the table. (p. 106)

------

What had been intended as a smear campaign turned out as such
campaigns often do: it backfired on its authors. “The Arabs went away
from the Ukaz fair that year knowing about Muhammad,” ibn-Ishaq would
write, “and he was talked about in the whole of Arabia.” (p. 107)

------

It’s said that he wept at the injustice of the boycott, summoned his
bishops to confirm that Muhammad’s message was also that of Jesus, and
indignantly refused offers of gold from a Meccan delegation demanding
that the refugees be sent back. But all of this errs on the side of
too good to be true. More likely, any official protection was accorded
the believers simply as foreign merchants, with permission to do
business as temporary residents. Certainly, the Negus remained
resolutely Christian. (p. 111)

------

Taking their cue from Muhammad himself, they met violence with
non-violence, a tactic that began to impress others with the injustice
of the whole situation. In fact it was this sense of manifest
injustice that now brought two famed warriors into the early Muslim
fold. (p. 114)

------

Muhammad sitting absolutely still as abu-Jahl stood over him, ranting
and cursing, all while “Muhammad answered not a word.” (p. 114)

------

Omar, whose height alone made him fearsome: he was said to “tower
above everyone else as though he were on horseback.” (p. 115)

------

If there was one man abu-Jahl could rely on to tolerate no
monotheistic nonsense, it was his nephew. (p. 115)

------

Omar was a nephew of abu-Jahl’s, after all, and it was his father who
years earlier had hounded his own half-brother Zayd the hanif out of
Mecca. (p. 115)

------

The need for patience and fortitude became a constant drumbeat
throughout the revelations from this period, creating an almost
Gandhian stance of non-violent resistance. (p. 117)

------

This was hard to do, the revelations acknowledged, but “do not waste
away your soul with regret for them.” (p. 117)

------

“Leave to themselves those who take their religion merely as a sport
and a pastime.” (p. 118)

------

Here, in the foundation text of Islam, is the source of the modern
Muslim sensitivity to insult that has taken so many by surprise. Where
satire may be thought relatively harmless in the non-Muslim West, a
matter more of entertainment than injury, the memory of the constant
Meccan taunting of Muhammad and the harassment of his early followers
would lie behind the worldwide outbreak of anger at the well-informed
satire of Salman Rushdie’s 1988 novel The Satanic Verses and at the
2005 publication in a Danish newspaper of crude cartoons of
Muhammad. (p. 118)

------

Since the wiser course in both instances would have been precisely the
one advocated by the Quran—to pay no attention to such
provocations—the fact that it was ignored has to be yet another of the
many indelible ironies of history and faith. (p. 118)

------

They did not deny God; the Kaaba was the divine sanctuary, and they
took their role as its custodians in good faith as much as good
profit. (p. 119)

------

“What have you done? You have recited something I did not bring you
from God, and you have said what he did not say to you.” In that
moment, Muhammad realized that he had been misled by his own desire
for reconciliation; he had taken the easier path rather than the hard
one laid down for him. (p. 120)

------

Such clerics deem the whole thing impossible, since it runs counter to
the tenet that Muhammad was divinely protected from error. Yet this
idea appears nowhere in the Quran. To the contrary, human fallibility
seems to be explicitly acknowledged in that verse stating that every
messenger and prophet had had words “cast into his mouth” by
Satan. (p. 121)

------

To an outside eye, however, the story of the Satanic Verses seems if
anything to reinforce Muhammad’s credibility. It casts light on the
process of revelation, showing it less as a miraculous coup de foudre
and more as a kind of collaboration between human and divine—an
ongoing conversation, as it were, in which one side speaks for
both. It allows us to see the depth of Muhammad’s pain and of his
desire for reconciliation. It reveals him as movingly vulnerable,
given to the very human habit of projecting his own deepest desire
onto divine will. And it shows him succumbing to a moment of
weakness, imagining he heard what he wanted to hear. (p. 121)

------

It has to have taken a great deal of courage for Muhammad to
acknowledge his mistake so publicly, all the more since it was clear
how it would be used against him. (p. 122)

------

As Kathryn Schulz writes in Being Wrong, the “idea of error . . . is
our meta-mistake: we are wrong about what it means to be wrong. Far
from being a sign of intellectual inferiority, the capacity to err is
crucial to human cognition. Far from being a moral flaw, it is
inextricable from some of our most humane and honorable qualities:
empathy, optimism, imagination, conviction, and courage.”14 (p. 122)

------

It was the means of making it clear that no matter how painful,
Muhammad needed to be true to himself, to his voice and to that of
God. (p. 123)

------

“I was never jealous of any of the prophet’s wives except for
Khadija, even though I came after her death.” (p. 124)

------

“Indeed no, God has not replaced her with a better,” he’d say. And the
man who though multiply married would never have any children after
Khadija then drove the point home: “God granted me her children while
withholding those of other women.” (p. 124)

------

In honor of the dead man’s memory, abu-Lahab assured his nephew that
he would protect him as abu-Talib had done, but his assurance was
short-lived. (p. 127)

------

Within a few days, stone-throwing thugs had hounded him out of Taif,
but since it was unsafe for him to return to Mecca without official
protection, he stopped a few miles short of the city and sent message
after message to several minor clan leaders, begging for their
help. (p. 129)

------

The aging al-Mutim was one of the few who had never supported the
boycott, and now he sent a small armed escort to accompany Muhammad
back into the city. (p. 129)

------

By turning toward it in prayer, the early believers affirmed the
primacy of Abraham as the founding monotheist in a tradition far more
ancient and venerable than those of the Meccan fathers. (p. 130)

------

He chose the milk as the middle way between asceticism and
indulgence, and Gabriel was delighted: “You have been rightly guided,
Muhammad, and so will your people be.” (p. 130)

------

Carefully choosing his words, he introduces the episode this way:
“This account is pieced together, each piece contributing something of
what that person was told about what happened.” And to indicate that
the story may be more a matter of faith than of fact, he makes ample
use of such phrases as “I was told that in his story al-Hassan
said . . .” or “One of abu-Bakr’s family told me that Aisha used to
say . . .” or “A traditionalist who had heard it from one who had
heard it from Muhammad said that Muhammad said . . .” (p. 130)

------

Whether the Night Journey was a dream, a vision, or lived experience,
ibn-Ishaq’s view is that what matters is not how it happened, but its
significance. (p. 131)

------

Despite his repeatedly acknowledged debt to ibn-Ishaq, he would omit
the episode altogether in his multi-volume history, and ignore the
much-quoted dictum attributed to Aisha, speaking many years after
Muhammad’s death: “The messenger’s body remained where it was, but God
removed his spirit by night.” (p. 131)

------

Joseph’s skill at dream interpretation made him a senior counselor to
Pharaoh, while Abraham, Jacob, Solomon, Saint Joseph, and Saint Paul
were all visited by God as they slept. (p. 132)

------

The mystical aspect of dreams would be incorporated into the
thirteenth-century Zohar, the foundation book of Kabbala, which would
identify the angel Gabriel as “the master of dreams” and the link
between God and human, as he was for Muhammad. One story about the
Kabbalist master Isaac Luria even has Gabriel appearing to him in a
dream wielding the stylus of a scribe. (p. 132)

------

As in Jacob’s dream in the book of Genesis, a ladder led up to
heaven. But where Jacob remained sleeping at the foot of the ladder,
Muhammad saw it as “that to which a dying man looks,” and climbed
it. Did he feel as though he was dying, as he had during that first
Quranic revelation on Mount Hira? Was this the death of the self that
has been the goal of mystics of all faiths, the better to unite with
the divine? Or did it seem as though he had taken leave of his body
and hovered above it, looking down at his earthly self as some who
survive near-death experiences report having done? (p. 134)

------

Muhammad is no longer the passive recipient of revelation but an
active participant: he flies, ascends, prays with the angels, and
speaks with the prophets. (p. 135)

------

Could the grandson establish a new home in his grandfather’s
birthplace? Put like that, it seems to have the power of narrative
inevitability. (p. 138)

------

Like the Meccans, most Medinans were already halfway to
monotheism. They recognized al-Lah as the high god even as many of
them followed the cult of Manat, one of the three “daughters of God,”
but since their economy was not built on traditional faith and
pilgrimage as was that of Mecca, it would be easier for them to make
the leap away from the totem gods. (p. 142)

------

[I]ts Arabic root hajar carries greater psychological weight. It means
to cut oneself off from something, with all the wrenching pain that
the term implies. (p. 146)

------

It might have been wiser for him to leave along with the first
emigrants, but he was determined to stay in Mecca until he was sure
that as many of his followers as possible had made it out
safely. (p. 148)

------

The Meccans had never taken the Medinans seriously before; the Khazraj
and the Aws were so divided that they posed no threat to anyone but
themselves. (p. 148)

------

Though the total population of Medina was about the same as that of
Mecca, some twenty-five thousand, the Medinans were farmers, not
fighters. (p. 148)

------

Knowing that the posse would look first on the route north out of
Mecca, toward Medina, they headed some five miles in the opposite
direction and hid out in a cave high on the side of Mount Thaur,
overlooking the southbound caravan route to Yemen. (p. 150)

------

As former New York governor Mario Cuomo once put it: “You campaign in
poetry, and govern in prose.” (p. 156)

------

“the Jews are one community with the believers,” the document
declared, again using the word umma. “Each must help the other against
anyone who attacks the people of this document. They must seek mutual
advice and consultation.” (p. 158)

------

In the insult of exile, turning the other cheek began to seem at best
ineffective, at worst self-defeating. So if the Meccan elite
anticipated a peaceful life without him, they would not do so for
long. (p. 159)

------

Eager to transform the stigma of exile into a banner of proud
defiance, they saw raiding as a way to get back at the Meccans where
it would hurt them most: in their traders’ pockets. (p. 160)

------

The early Islamic histories would call these raids military
expeditions, but all through the year 623 they were hardly on that
level. In fact they were strikingly unsuccessful. In March, for
instance, seven months after the hijra, thirty emigrants under the
command of Muhammad’s uncle Hamza tried to intercept a Meccan caravan
led by abu-Jahl but “separated without a battle” after the local
Beduin chieftain intervened. (p. 160)

------

The emigrants seemed to be so ineffective a fighting force that even
when Beduin raided their milk camels just outside Medina and they set
off in pursuit, they lost track of them. (p. 160)

------

He was not aiming for material success so much as to disrupt the
smooth working of the caravans. He was making a point, establishing
his presence beyond Medina as a force to be reckoned with, and doing
so at very little cost. (p. 160)

------

But whatever their mission was, the men he sent had been miserably
unsuccessful. Two had carelessly forgotten to hobble their riding
camels one night, so had been forced to stay behind and search for
them after they’d wandered off into the desert. The remaining six got
as far as Nakhla, between Mecca and Taif, where they came across four
Meccans traveling with a few camels loaded with raisins and
leather. (p. 161)

------

To kill a Meccan for the sake of a few loads of leather and raisins?
This was pure provocation. Had they really invited Muhammad to Medina
to make peace between them, only to have him then declare war on
someone else? (p. 161)

------

“Fight in the way of God those who fight you, but do not begin
hostilities, for God does not like the aggressor,” (p. 162)

------

Revelation was needed, and it came. “They question you with regard to
warfare in the sacred month,” the Quranic voice told him. “Say:
‘Fighting in that month is a great offense, but still greater offenses
in God’s eyes are to bar others from God’s path, to disbelieve in him,
to prevent access to the Kaaba, and to expel its people. Persecution
is worse than killing.’” And to clarify things (p. 162)

------

“Permission is granted to those who fight because they have been
wronged . . . those who have been driven out of their houses without
right only because they said our god is God.” In other words, offense
was now sanctioned in the name of ex post facto defense. (p. 162)

------

“If you object to the political methods recommended because they seem
to you morally detestable, if you refuse to embark on them because
they are too frightening,”8 Berlin wrote, “then Machiavelli’s answer
is that you are perfectly entitled to lead a morally good life, be a
private citizen (or a monk), seek some corner of your own. But in that
event, you must not make yourself responsible for the lives of others
or expect good fortune; in a material sense you must expect to be
ignored or destroyed.” (p. 165)

------

Machiavelli himself famously put it: “All armed prophets have
conquered, and unarmed prophets have come to grief.” (p. 165)

------

Under the command of the head of Mecca’s Umayyad clan, abu-Sufyan,
there would be more than two thousand camels returning from Damascus,
loaded with luxury goods. And they’d be an easy target: Muhammad’s
scouts had reported the presence of only seventy armed
guards. (p. 166)

------

“You came out to protect your caravan and your property, oh Quraysh,”
his message said. “God has kept them safe, so turn back.” (p. 167)

------

As Machiavelli would put it, “There is no doubt that a ruler’s
greatness depends on his triumphing over difficulties and
opposition. So fortune finds enemies for him and encourages them to
take the field against him, so that he may have cause to triumph over
them and ascend higher on the ladder his foes have provided.” (p. 168)

------

Not only would his forces advance on to Badr, he declared, but “we
will spend three days there, slaughter camels, and give food to eat
and wine to drink to all, so that the Beduin may hear of what we have
done and continue to hold us in awe.” (p. 168)

------

Muhammad told his men as he surveyed the field afterward, as much in
sadness as in pride. The crème de la crème of Mecca had fought what
they thought was a ragtag group of outcasts, including freed
slaves—their own former slaves!—and lost. What had happened at Badr
was simply not possible, not in their scheme of things. The natural
order of their world had been upended. (p. 170)

------

Determined to show no favor, Muhammad held both men along with the
others, but when Zaynab sent jewels from Mecca as ransom payment—a
good wife, she had stayed with her husband in Mecca rather than
emigrate—she included a necklace that had been Khadija’s wedding gift
to her. (p. 171)

------

By pledging mutual self-defense and recognizing Muhammad’s authority,
they were allying themselves with the new umma; in time, belief would
follow action. (p. 173)

------

If he was to establish his newly made power position, he would need to
meet the expectations of his time. A new ruthlessness was called for,
and it would be demonstrated nowhere more than in his relations with
the Jewish tribes of Medina. (p. 173)

------

Like all Arabians, the Jews spoke of God as al-Lah, the high one, and
often used the honorific that would become familiar in the Quran,
ar-Rahman, the merciful, just as the newly completed Babylonian Talmud
used Rahmana. (p. 174)

------

“Believers, Jews, Christians, Zoroastrians, whoever believes in God
and the Day of Judgment and does what is right, all shall be rewarded
by God . . . We believe in God and in what was revealed to us, in that
which was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael, to Isaac and Jacob and the
tribes, and in that which God gave to Moses and Jesus and the
prophets. We discriminate against none of them.” (p. 175)

------

While details of the biblical stories as told in the Quran certainly
differ from those now accepted in the West as canonical, they were
current throughout the Middle East of the time. (p. 176)

------

With its vivid image of a victimized half-naked girl, it was perfectly
calculated to inflame the imagination. Nobody could honorably stand by
and allow that to happen. Yet at least part of the story is clearly
apocryphal, since no Medinan women, let alone hard-working Beduin,
wore veils at that time. The idea of the veil would be introduced only
three years later, and then only for Muhammad’s wives. (p. 177)

------

This was an over-reaction on his part, but that was precisely the
point: it was a demonstration of his power and authority, and of
ibn-Ubayy’s lack of the same. (p. 179)

------

They were allowed to take only what they could carry. What they left
behind—land, palm groves, houses—would be divided among the emigrants,
with one fifth kept back for the community treasury. The rest of
Medina watched silently. If there was irony in the fact that the
exiles had now in turn exiled others, nobody cared to comment on
it. (p. 180)

------

That same night, he went to her house, found her asleep with her
youngest child in her arms, and drove his sword through her
breast. “Shall I have to bear any penalty on her account?” he asked
Muhammad the next morning. The answer was curt: “Two goats shall not
come to blows for her.” (p. 181)

------

Just as the Jews swore with their bodies never to forget Jerusalem—“If
I forget thee, oh Jerusalem, let my right hand be cut off”—so now the
Muslim believers were to use their bodies as a reminder to never
forget Mecca. (p. 182)

------

Where abu-Jahl’s fierce opposition had only strengthened Muhammad
instead of weakening him, abu-Sufyan would have aimed for containment
rather than repression. He might even have co-opted some of Muhammad’s
social principles, whether out of political calculation or recognition
of their value. (p. 183)

------

One believer would remember him taunting every enemy fighter he came
across that day, and in particular a man whose mother was a female
circumciser in Mecca, a practice Hamza clearly saw as belonging to the
dark days of jahiliya, or pre-Islamic ignorance. (p. 188)

------

“Then hear this,” abu-Sufyan shouted back. And instead of threatening
to finish the job or gloating in victory as might have been expected,
he made it clear that his wife’s mutilation of Hamza’s corpse had not
been at his orders: “Some of your dead have been mutilated. I neither
commanded this nor forbade it, and it neither gave me pleasure nor
saddened me.” (p. 190)

------

Any leader can use a victory to his advantage, but one who can turn
defeat to his advantage is much rarer. Muhammad had done it before,
after being hounded out of Mecca, and now he would do it again, with
ibn-Ubayy unwittingly making his task all the easier. (p. 191)

------

The new coinage was a challenge to all those who had accepted islam
but did not necessarily accord every statement of Muhammad’s the power
of divine authority. They distinguished, that is, between the
messenger and the politician, and it was this distinction that the
Quranic voice now seemed to blur. The messenger was fast becoming the
prophet, no longer simply “one of you,” but to be thought of as
divinely directed in every aspect of his life. (p. 192)

------

The plan was apparently to drop a large boulder from the top of the
wall against which Muhammad was sitting and then call it an
accident. It was foiled at the last moment, when Muhammad suddenly
left “as though to answer a call of nature” and never came back,
explaining later that an angel had quietly warned him of the
conspiracy. But angel or no, every detail makes it an unlikely
scenario. The council meeting on the Sabbath; Muhammad’s departure
without abu-Bakr and Omar, presumably leaving them in danger; the
little logistical matter of exactly how a heavy boulder could be
brought to the top of a wall, let alone dropped from it with fatal
precision—none of these seem likely. That is, they are the hallmarks
of a story fabricated to justify what happened next, in the awareness
that it might otherwise not be considered justifiable. (p. 195)

------

The language itself was telling: not Medina, nor even the pre-Islamic
name Yathrib, but “my city.” And treason charged not against Medina
but “against me.” It was a statement of absolute authority: L’état
c’est moi. (p. 195)

------

In Arabia, trees of any kind were treasured, but date palms especially
so. Each one represented generations of careful tending and work, so
that to destroy the palms was to destroy not only property but
history. Cutting them down was a calculated statement that the Nadir
now had nothing left to stay for, and a warning of what might happen
to them if they resisted further. (p. 196)

------

Unlike the Qaynuqa, the Nadir left Medina in what seemed more like a
triumphal parade. They beat drums and tambourines as they went,
dressed in their finest clothes and decked out in all their
jewelry. As one witness put it: “They went with a splendor and a glory
the like of which had never been seen from any tribe in their time.”
It was an impressive display of protest, a defiant statement by the
Nadir that they were the ones who should be proud, and all the rest of
Medina ashamed. (p. 196)

------

For the volatile Omar, however, this was not enough. Always the
warrior, he urged Muhammad to have done with ibn-Ubayy and give the
order to kill him. Instead, he received a political lesson. “What?
And let men say that Muhammad slays his companions?” came the
reply. To make a martyr of ibn-Ubayy would only be counter-productive;
he was far more useful kept close, as a subordinate. (p. 197)

------

The first of his late-life marriages, to a quiet widow named Sawda,
had been arranged by his followers, who were concerned about the depth
of his grief for Khadija. (p. 198)

------

As one of Islam’s most powerful politicians would remember years
later, “There was never any subject I wished closed that she would not
open, or that I wished open that she would not close.” (p. 199)

------

If Aisha was indeed married so young, however, others would certainly
have remarked on it at the time. Instead, more restrained reports have
her aged nine when she was betrothed and twelve when she was actually
married, which makes sense since custom dictated that girls be married
at puberty. But then again, to have been married at the customary age
would make Aisha normal, and that was the one thing she was always
determined not to be. (p. 200)

------

[k]ind of Arabian syllabub, probably, made with egg whites and goat’s
milk beaten thick with honey, for which he had a special
weakness. (p. 200)

------

Other times she went further, as when Muhammad arranged to seal an
alliance with a major Christian tribe in the time-honored manner by
marrying its leader’s daughter, a girl renowned for her beauty. When
the bride-to-be arrived in Medina, Aisha volunteered to help prepare
her for the wedding and, under the guise of sisterly advice, told her
that Muhammad would think all the more highly of her if she at first
resisted him on the wedding night by saying, “I take refuge with God
from thee.” The new bride had no idea that this was the phrase used to
annul a marriage; the moment she said it, Muhammad left, and the next
day she was bundled unceremoniously back to her own people. (p. 200)

------

The whole purpose of his marrying so many times was to bind together
the widening umma of believers and allies, but such alliances were
sealed by children. Mixed blood was new blood, free of the old
divisions. What was the point of marriage without offspring? (p. 204)

------

Since all the wives except Aisha were widows or divorcées and already
had children by other husbands, infertility on their part is
unlikely. Perhaps, then, despite the highly sexualized image of him in
the West, the multiply married Muhammad was celibate. Or since anyone
lucky enough to reach his fifties in the seventh century was
physiologically far older than he would be today, age may have worked
on him to lessen desire, or maybe simply sperm count. But Islamic
theologians in centuries to come would posit another explanation. The
absence of children with these later wives, they’d say, was the price
of revelation. Since the Quran was the last and final word of God,
there could be no more prophets after Muhammad, and thus no sons to
inherit the prophetic gene. Essentially, they finessed the issue, as
theologians often do, in this case by saying that a man so graced with
revelation was beyond the simple everyday grace of offspring. (p. 205)

------

Conflating adultery with rape, they’d argue that any such charge could
be valid only if the woman could do the virtually impossible and
produce four witnesses. Unless she could do so, a ghastly catch-22
came into effect: the accused rapist was to be declared blameless and
the accuser punished not only for slander but for adultery, since by
charging rape she had herself testified to illicit sexual
relations. (p. 207)

------

The believers kept close tabs on how much time Muhammad spent with
which wife, whose honeyed drink he seemed to like best, what mood he
was in after spending the night with whom. There could hardly be a
more public private life, one far more conducive to stress than to the
licentiousness imagined with such envious censoriousness by many
Victorian-era European scholars. (p. 209)

------

Far from encouraging polygamy, the revelation went on to openly
discourage it. Four wives were permitted only so long as each had
equal status. But that, said the Quran, was hardly likely. Muhammad
was to instruct his followers that “you will never be able to deal
equitably between many wives, no matter how hard you try, so if you
fear you cannot treat them equally, then marry only one.” (p. 209)

------

Muhammad had again held off a huge Meccan army, yet his followers gave
him little credit for it. They were left full of an intense
frustration created by the enforced powerlessness of having been under
siege. However successful the defensive strategy of the dry moat, it
ran against the grain psychologically. That enemy accusation of having
acted in an “un-Arab” way by avoiding battle rather than rushing into
it cut deep into their sense of honor. (p. 215)

------

Some scholars suspect that the early Islamic historians created this
role for Saad in order to absolve Muhammad from responsibility for the
massacre. It establishes plausible deniability, since it could then be
argued that this was not Muhammad’s decision but Saad’s, and that
Muhammad had no choice but to honor the word of the dying man. But the
argument itself reveals a painful awareness that this was something
that needed justifying, and so was implicitly not justifiable. It
certainly seems unlikely that Muhammad would leave such a drastic
decision to someone else, let alone to a man who was not one of his
senior advisers. And even if the decision was not made directly by
him, it was clearly made at the very least with his consent. Indeed,
far from overruling it, Muhammad personally oversaw the
executions. Trenches were dug alongside Medina’s main marketplace, and
when that was done, all the Qureyz men—“all those on whose chins a
razor had passed,” as ibn-Ishaq puts it—were led out in small groups,
made to kneel by the trenches, and beheaded. (p. 217)

------

It was now crystal clear to all that there would be no further
tolerance of any form of dissent. (p. 218)

------

There is sometimes a very fine line, if not an invisible one, between
reason and rationalization. Innumerable reasons have been given over
the centuries for the massacre of the Qureyz. It has been argued that
they collaborated with the Meccans, though there is no convincing
evidence that they did. That this was standard operating procedure for
the time and place, though it was not. That Muhammad did not order it
himself, which is only technically true. That the Qureyz themselves
expected nothing less, though most of them clearly did. That Muhammad
was left with no choice, which ignores the established alternative of
expulsion. That the high number of executions is exaggerated, which
while quite possible is also impossible to demonstrate. Even that the
massacre was justified by the Quran, despite the fact that the Quran
demands an absolute end to hostilities the moment an enemy
submits. (p. 219)

------

“A ruler must want to have a reputation for compassion rather than for
cruelty,” he wrote, “but he must nonetheless be careful not to make
bad use of compassion.” (p. 220)

------

At the head of the procession were seventy specially fatted camels,
each one a perfect specimen adorned for sacrifice with the customary
woven garlands and necklaces. The most resplendent of them was also
the most recognizable: the magnificent silver-nose-ringed male that
had once been the pride and joy of Muhammad’s nemesis abu-Jahl, and
had been chosen by Muhammad as his share of the booty after the Battle
of Badr. The symbolism of his bringing it back to Mecca for sacrifice
was unmistakable. (p. 222)

------

In time, the truce of Hudaibiya would come to be seen as a strategic
masterstroke on Muhammad’s part. Ibn-Ishaq would write that “no
victory greater than this one had been won previously in Islam. There
had only been fighting before, but when the truce took place and war
laid down its burdens and all the people felt safe with each other,
they met with each other in conversation and debate, and all who
possessed understanding and were told about islam accepted it.”
(p. 226)

------

Whether in the seventh century or the twenty-first, he would frustrate
the simplistic terms of those trying to pigeonhole him as either a
“prophet of peace” or a “prophet of war.” This was not a matter of
either/or. A complex man carving a huge profile in history, his vision
went beyond seemingly irreconcilable opposites. He had allowed himself
to be turned away from Mecca in the full knowledge that he had in fact
completed the first stage of his return. (p. 227)

------

When abu-Sufyan had led a massive army against Medina, with its
similar system of strongholds, he had laid siege to it and failed. Now
Muhammad would give practically a textbook illustration of how it
should be done. (p. 228)

------

Having established how severe he could be, he had no need to resort to
such drastic measures again. Considering what they might have faced,
the Khaybar tribes willingly agreed: they accepted Muhammad’s
political authority and his protection, pledged their support, and
surrendered half their annual income in taxes to Medina. (p. 228)

------

The man who had laid siege to Medina just three years before was now
obliged to beg for Muhammad’s restraint, appealing to him on the
grounds that only with Muhammad’s cooperation could he contain the
hardliners at home in Mecca. (p. 231)

------

What happened next can only have been agreed on beforehand. Abu-Sufyan
came out of Mecca and rode into the Medinan encampment on a
distinctive white horse that belonged to Muhammad, a sign that he was
under Muhammad’s protection. (p. 232)

------

While the popularly accepted image has him demonstratively smashing
the idols said to be inside the Kaaba, there is no historical record
of this, not least because the sanctuary was almost certainly empty of
all physical representation. (p. 237)

------

It was a private moment, unrecorded, so that one can only imagine him
closing the door behind him and welcoming the hush as the men’s shouts
of acclaim and the women’s ululations of celebration were muffled by
the thick stone walls and he was a man alone once more, whispering
into the darkness, offering a quiet prayer of praise and
thanksgiving. (p. 238)

------

The massacre of the Qureyz had already established that he was capable
of ruthlessness when he deemed it necessary; he had no need to prove
it again. On the contrary, to forgo revenge even when it seemed
justified would create a sense of obligation and loyalty far more
reliable than anything that could be obtained by force. (p. 239)

------

It was true. Here was the oldest daughter of his foster mother
Halima—the girl in whose arms he’d wriggled and fought when all she
was trying to do was keep him safe—reduced all these years later to
begging him for mercy. Was this what warfare and victory brought?
When would it end? Childhood memories crowded in on the newly
acknowledged head of state, reminding him of the extraordinary
distance he had traveled. Holding back tears, he stunned everyone by
spreading out his cloak and inviting Shayma to come sit on it beside
him. (p. 242)

------

To devout Muslims, the speed of the Arab conquests in the decade after
Muhammad’s death seems a manifestation of divine will. Even modern
historians appear somewhat at a loss to explain it, falling back on
hoary Orientalist theories like “a tribal imperative to conquest.” In
fact such cultural assumptions are not only questionable but
unnecessary. (p. 246)

------

The curtain in question was just that: a piece of muslin draped over a
section of each room, providing at least a modicum of privacy. It
applied only to Muhammad’s wives, and there is no historical
indication that he ever intended it to be taken as an order for any
woman to veil. The Quran would advocate modesty for both sexes, but it
never specified veiling, which is in any case a misnomer. What would
be called “the veil” was in fact a thin shawl, and when it was first
adopted in Islam, decades after Muhammad’s death, it was to a large
degree a matter of status. (p. 248)

------

Like an expensive manicure or a pair of Prada shoes today, it was a
public indicator, a sign that these women were above any kind of hard
work. They had servants, and so could allow themselves the luxury of
flamboyantly impractical dress. (p. 248)

------

Within a few months of Muhammad’s return from Mecca, dissension had
built to such a pitch that he simply couldn’t take it any longer. In
effect, he declared a strike against his role as a multiple husband,
and began sleeping alone in a small storeroom on the roof of the
mosque. Word of this spread instantly, and along with it the rumor
that he was about to divorce all nine of his wives. (p. 249)

------

It seems strange, however, that while none of the late-life wives had
a child by Muhammad, this girl named after the mother of Jesus
reportedly did. The symbolic significance is clear. A son of Mary and
Muhammad named after the man the Quran honored as the first hanif, the
Bible’s founding monotheist, would appeal to Christians throughout the
Middle East. (p. 250)

------

That sparse rooftop retreat was the Medinan equivalent of Mecca’s
Mount Hira: a place of contemplation in which to come to terms not
only with what he had achieved but also with what lay ahead. He must
have realized that there was no room left in his life for personal
attachment, and that his relationship with Mariya would end here. His
life was no longer his own to determine, but belonged instead to the
umma. And he certainly sensed that not much of that life remained to
him, because when he emerged at the end of the month, he resolved his
marital situation with a new Quranic revelation that anticipated his
own death. (p. 251)

------

Those in favor argued that he was the Paraclete, or Comforter, whose
arrival Jesus had foretold in the Gospel of John and who was said to
embody the Holy Spirit, even to be “the second Jesus.” Those against
maintained that the Paraclete was supposed to have sons, and since
Muhammad did not, it could not possibly be him. Determined to resolve
the dispute by debating the matter with him directly, the Najran
delegation arrived in Medina only to find that debate was
moot. (p. 255)

------

Indeed the Quran argued for humility as the highest virtue,
continually warning against pride and arrogance. But now the
widespread reverence for him threatened to make humility a thing of
the past. No matter how much he tried to delegate authority, his
revelations were still the word of God, and for the believers it was a
small leap to assuming that everything he said, down to the last
exclamation or passing comment, was a reflection of divine will. For
all the Quran’s insistence that he was just a man, obedience to him
was sworn in the same breath as obedience to God. (p. 256)

------

Ibn-Ishaq explains this absence by arguing that Muhammad had declared
that this would be the last year anyone who had not accepted islam
would be allowed to participate in the hajj, and thus would not make
his own pilgrimage until Mecca was free of all paganism for the
duration. (p. 256)

------

Throughout this year, Aisha would recall Muhammad spending nights on
end in the graveyard of Medina, standing vigil for the dead. There
were so many of them by now. Among the simple stone markers, each one
barely higher than a child’s knee, were those of two of his four
daughters, as well as that of his adopted son Zayd. (p. 256)

------

“Peace be upon you, oh people of the graves,” Aisha heard him
saying. “Happy are you, so much better off than men here.” (p. 257)

------

Omar would remember being shocked to see Muhammad at the burial: “I
confronted him and said, ‘Are you going to pray over God’s enemy?’ But
he smiled and said, ‘Leave me be, Omar. I have been given the choice
and I have chosen.’ Then he prayed and walked with ibn-Ubayy’s body
until it was lowered into the grave.” (p. 257)

------

The more he was surrounded by people, the more Muhammad seemed aware
of his isolation. “God made him love solitude,” Aisha would say,
trying to explain why he preferred the company of the dead to that of
his wives. But even in the dead of night, real solitude was the one
thing that was impossible. (p. 257)

------

Both ibn-Ishaq and al-Tabari quote people who were there and who swear
they heard one version or the other with their own ears. But as with
first-hand testimony today, what they heard may have reflected what
they were prepared to hear as much as what was actually said. It would
soon be argued that the alternate versions of this one sentence came
to essentially the same thing, since the ahl al-bayt personified the
sunna just as Muhammad himself had done. (p. 259)

------

This was no mere headache but a fatal disease, and indeed the symptoms
and the duration of Muhammad’s final illness—ten days—are classic for
bacterial meningitis. (p. 262)

------

Over the course of those ten days of his illness, all of the men who
were to be the first five caliphs of Islam would be in and out of his
sickroom: two fathers-in-law, abu-Bakr and Omar; two sons-in-law, Ali
and Uthman; and a brother-in-law, Muawiya. But how that would happen,
and in what order, was to remain the stuff of discord. (p. 263)

------

There was no pomp or circumstance, no elaborate ritual or mass
procession, no throngs of mourners, no eulogies. Muhammad was buried
in the dead of night, as quietly and inconspicuously as he had been
born, and one has to think that this is exactly as he would have
wished it. As he entered his grave, he was simply a man again, free of
the intense public scrutiny that had hemmed him in. The peace and
quiet he had sought would finally be his. At last, he would find some
rest. (p. 271)
