Philosophy: The Classics (Nigel Warburton)
==========================================

:date: 2015-02-12 23:08:38 +0200

.. :author: Emin Reşah
.. :date: Wed Jan 21 21:48:25 EET 2015 
.. :dp: 12974 

I was expecting more from this book. I read a few pages, two chapters
perhaps but I didn't learn anything I wasn't aware. The following are
some quotations from the part I've read.

------

[T]hose who help themselves to more than their fair share are happier
than those who are just. (page 59)

------

Glaucon takes this further, suggesting that those who behave justly
only do so as a form of self-preservation. (page 59)

------

[I]n the rest of the book Socrates attempts to do precisely that; he
seeks to demonstrate that justice does pay, and that, besides, it is
intrinsically worthwhile. (page 60)

------

To weed out unsuitable candidates, Plato suggests that in the course
of their education potential Rulers should be given various tests to
see if they are likely to be bewitched by the pursuit of their own
pleasure: their reactions to temptation will be closely monitored and
only those who demonstrate complete devotion to the well-being of the
community will be chosen to rule. (page 61)

------

[I]t can only ever be a copy of an appearance and so tends to distance
us from the world of the Forms. Second, it appeals to the irrational
part of our souls and so tends to disrupt the psychic harmony
necessary for justice. (page 68)

------

[W]ithout the notion that philosophers are particularly good at
gaining knowledge of reality, there would be no obvious justification
for putting them in charge of the ideal state. (page 70)

------

Morality is usually thought to involve at least some concern for the
interests of others: it wouldn’t make sense to say (using the
present-day understanding of ‘morality’) ‘I have developed my own
private morality which is entirely selfish.’ (page 77)

------

[I]n many areas of our lives we have a capacity for choice; in
contrast, an ant simply behaves because it cannot deliberate on what
it might or might not do. (page 79)

------

It is the familiar situation when you know what you should do, what
would make your life more successful, yet you stubbornly choose what
you know to be the worse option. (page 80)

------

Philosophy argues that God’s knowing that certain choices will be made
does not cause those things to happen – human beings can still make
choices. (page 90)
